---
title: Introduction to the Humanities
description: C100
dateCreated: 2022-05-09T13:37:26.768Z
published: true
editor: markdown
tags: College, Humanities
dateModified: 
---

# Introduction to Humanities – C100

## Still need to convert these written notes

[https://quizlet.com/273188011/c100-wg...](https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=_z9rSpiLoio&redir_token=QUFFLUhqa3BQTmVZcDVDYzlXWFNOV05WSHd6WlFZdFJkd3xBQ3Jtc0tuNzd3TDhzanpoMnFqT2VoNHN6aGluSWJWLVd1UFBYTTMzcGlXZk5TYjFvSG5wY25FVUhramd6TnlTNE1kMWQ4dE40WUQ3RUY2a3lJak5IdE1oUVBwZUZNb3lsQ0hscjdzVS1VeFNaWGp6MEwzRENiWQ%3D%3D&event=video_description&q=https%3A%2F%2Fquizlet.com%2F273188011%2Fc100-wgu-objective-assessment-vocab-flash-cards%2F)

[https://quizlet.com/272137189/c100-wg...](https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=_z9rSpiLoio&redir_token=QUFFLUhqblhHdVV3ZzJaaDdrbVJHZ1hhUEpjSjJvc24wUXxBQ3Jtc0tsandmZWFEeFZWYTVvaTBXejZlX2JobHA4Sjc1WXNoM0QxeTVUTWpIZ0V4LUpHTG1MelVORDVBM0NLVGFHYzRNTnFfUEVSNWdZeFB2ZjBSb0kzSkM4ZjM0bks3S1o3Y3FIS2xZcEpFMjgyMTZtUGdCbw%3D%3D&event=video_description&q=https%3A%2F%2Fquizlet.com%2F272137189%2Fc100-wgu-objective-assessment-flash-cards%2F)

[https://quizlet.com/352402776/wgu-c10...](https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=_z9rSpiLoio&redir_token=QUFFLUhqbExrRFNkM1YwTDMxczBmU3hnOEJZNk5DOXhDQXxBQ3Jtc0tsUUk4SnBMLXREczlfSENRaUd0T3FFcDdRcVhlcUdnTVpTWDY3XzR1Vl9hLVA1MEx5UkNBM2llU1UzS0NOYWpBVFFFc2tIYVZOWXF5b2I4X0ZtZHpxQ1E0akRhelZSakRkUU1XdGlPNkdGYWVuY2tGTQ%3D%3D&event=video_description&q=https%3A%2F%2Fquizlet.com%2F352402776%2Fwgu-c100-humanities-flash-cards%2F)

[https://quizlet.com/191280857/c100-ma...](https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=_z9rSpiLoio&redir_token=QUFFLUhqbXBwLVYzQVBpZ2FZZFE4LW1lZ3VQZERqelpoUXxBQ3Jtc0tsb0JhZGRxVTdBbUNGSnVERTlpemxpWUc3bzFqT2RzM0JMQ3QzQ3BuMUs0N1hKXzhBV2pkLVFjaWJCeVRONjJFMVUtR25ZaXFoYzVDZ0dUVnNMRkZoNkNHc1ZJX09od3BYTDlGVUVNTTZrbmZpYVVkOA%3D%3D&event=video_description&q=https%3A%2F%2Fquizlet.com%2F191280857%2Fc100-major-themes-humanities-flash-cards%2F)

From <<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_z9rSpiLoio>\>

\- An experience of beauty that inspires a feeling of pleasure is often referred to as an aesthetic experience

 -

# Questions

Question 1

An experience of beauty that inspires a feeling of pleasure is often referred to as an aesthetic experience.

Question 2

Why is architecture considered an art?

Because architecture is concerned with the aesthetic effect of structures in their environment

Question 3

How can art function beyond its merely aesthetic value?

It can act as political and social commentary, serve as an artifact of culture, and provide enjoyment.

Question 4

Which of the following disciplines falls within the realm of Humanities?

Music, Religion, Literature, Architecture

Question 5

Traditional stories that serve to explain some natural phenomenon, the origin of humanity, or customs or religious rites are known as Myths.

Question 6

Logic, aesthetics, and epistemology are all branches of which of the following?

Philosophy

Question 7

Which of the following is a function of art?

Art can assist in physical and emotional healing. , Art can be used to enable commerce in advertising products and services. , Art provides aesthetic pleasure.

Question 8

Love and the archetype of the hero are both examples of which of the following?

Universal themes

Question 9

When studying the Humanities, a chronological timeline of events allows us to see connections between cause and effect.

Question 1

Which of the following are true of the relationship between the humanities and technology?

Technology has led to an increase in globalization by making the world smaller and connecting people together through social networks via the internet

Technology has increased our ability to preserve, document and share works of art, literature, and music in a way that is unprecedented.

Question 2

Which of the following themes is found in multiple historical periods?

Individualism

Question 3

How do we identify themes in a literary or artistic work?

Look for the unifying or main ideas.

Question 4

Which of the following is true of myths?

They are traditional stories of a people or culture that are told to explain natural phenomena and to record values and belief systems from generation to generation. They utilize archetypes and symbols to find a deeper understanding of life.

Question 5

Match the following Humanities disciplines with their definitions.

• A. Part of public ceremony, ritual, or entertainment dates back to the earliest human civilizations

C. Architecture	• B. Stems from the early Greeks, with their development of tragedy and comedy

• C. Concerned with the interplay of form and function.

D. Religion	• D. Can include any system of ethics, values, and beliefs.

A. Dance

B. Theater

Question 6

Which discipline of the Humanities is primarily concerned with critical inquiry and reasoned argument?

Philosophy

Question 7

The Bayeux Tapestry's depiction of the Norman Conquest of England fulfills which purpose of art?

Art as political propaganda.

Question 8

What are the Humanities?

The study of the how the human race understands and documents the human experience through creative contributions in art, music, literature, philosophy, religion, dance, etc.

Question 9

Which of the following are examples of universal themes in this Module?

Love and the Hero

Question 10

Match the following Humanities terms to their definitions:

• A. Brotherly or selfless love.

C. Aesthetic	• B. A recurrent example or model of human behavior

• C. An experience of beauty that is its own justification

(D) A. Eros	• D. Passionate or sexual love

• E. A myth that is embraced by a majority of people throughout history.

E. Monomyth

B. Archetypes

(A) D. Agape

Question 11

Why is E.O. Wilson's theory of consilience important to the study of the Humanities?

It reinforces interdisciplinary study and facilitates the exchange of information necessary to create a more holistic understanding of who we are.

Question 12

How was Humanism reflected in the nonwestern world?

Ancient Chinese culture embraced principles in Confucianism and Buddhism that mirrored Humanist principles.

Question 13

How does studying the Humanities increase cross-cultural communication?

It helps us to interact with and understand a variety of people from different times and different places through their creative contributions.

Question 14

How does studying the portrayal of love over time enhance one's understanding of humanity?

The study of love in all its forms (eros, agape, and platonic love) illustrates a distinction in types of love that has captured the attention of artists.

Question 15

What is the difference between a myth and a monomyth?

Myths can include a wide variety of narratives and archetypes. The monomyth focuses on the hero's journey.

Which of the following plays was written by the Greek dramatist Sophocles?

Oedipus Rex

Question 2

Which one of the following poets wrote The Iliad?

Homer

Question 3

Greek architecture was based on which structure?

post-and-lintel

Question 4

The Greek building most revered for its use of ratio and perspective is \________\_.

the Parthenon

Question 5

Greek plays were generally shown in a/an \________\_.

Amphitheater

Question 6

Roman engineering allowed the \_________\_ to have the largest single span dome for centuries.

the Pantheon

Question 7

In Plato's Allegory of the Cave, what do the shadows represent?

everyday life

Question 8

Belief in multiple gods is known as \___________\_.

Polytheism

Question 9

The ancient Greeks developed which form of government?

Democracy

Question 10

Classical drama consisted of which of the following?

Tragedies,  Comedies, Satyr plays

Match the work with the description:

• A. Emphasized the themes of order and balance in its construction as a temple to the goddess Athena, patron of Athens.

B. The Republic	• B. Applied reason and logical thought to ideas about government and how to live a good, balanced life.

• C. An epic poem narrating the story of an ideal Greek hero who combined all the greatest virtues of Greek culture, as well as showing his interaction with the Greek pantheon of gods.

D. Oedipus Rex	• D. A story of a man who lives his life not knowing the truth of his parentage and whose pride ultimately causes him to ignore his flawed humanity, resulting in the ultimate punishment of blindness and exile.

• E. A play about heroic women who withhold sex from their husbands in order to end the Peloponnesian war and force a more democratic, egalitarian political climate.

C. The Odyssey

A. The Parthenon

E. Lysistrata

Question 2

Sappho's lyric poem "A Lament for Adonis" represents what major theme of the Classical Period?

The theme of humanism because it emphasizes human passions and emotions rather than idealized gods.

Question 3

Why is the statue The Metropolitan Kouros a notable example of Greek sculpture?

•

It utilized vertical and horizontal symmetry in creating the human form.

Question 4

Which of the following is an innovation during the Classical Period that was based on balance and reason?

The development of Western philosophy and the ideas that underlie the modern scientific method.

Question 5

What is the primary difference between Greek and Roman societies?

The Greeks lived in democratically-run city-states while the Romans had a larger centralized republic and eventually empire.

Question 6

How do the visual art and architecture of Greece and Rome differ (choose 2)?

Much of the sculpture in Greece was focused on honoring deities and elevating the human form while Rome used art predominantly to glorify the Roman Empire.

The Greeks relied on post-and-lintel construction, and the Romans developed the use of columns and arches to design larger buildings.

Question 7

Which of the following reflects the theme of humanism in the Classical Period? (Choose 2)

Greek philosophers questioned the truth of ancient religious myths in which gods acted unjustly.

Aristotle investigated qualities that led to human excellence and made for a good life.

Question 8

Which of the following types of cultural exchange took place during the Classical Period?

The Greeks borrowed the alphabet of the Phoenicians and used Egyptian influences in their sculpture.

Question 9

Which of the following were the main means of cultural exchange during the Classical Period? (Choose 2)

Greece and Rome's proximity to the Mediterranean Sea facilitated the exchange of goods and ideas with other civilizations.

The Silk Road provided access to Asia, allowing Eastern religions such as Buddhism and Daoism to filter into Europe along with goods.

Question 10

Which of the following aspects of life today are directly influenced by the Classical Period? (Choose 2)

Democracy, U.S. National Monuments

Question 11

How does the contemporary film Oh Brother, Where Art Thou? represent classical influence?

The protagonist's journey draws on a number of motifs, themes, and characters from the classical epic The Odyssey.

Question 12

In his work, The Republic, Plato describes how best to create a fair and orderly society. Which of the following most closely represents his argument?

People are able to think rationally, but they are they are predisposed to act in their own self-interest, so they should be ruled by a philosopher-king who makes decisions based on reason and justice.

Question 13

How did Aristotle's teaching reflect humanism in the Classical Period?

He argued that reason is necessary to guide humans to right behavior and that achieving balance through the Golden Mean creates a virtuous character.

Question 14

Which musical fragments were dedicated to the god Apollo and are among the earliest examples of written music?

The Delphic Hymns

Question 15

Which of the following are themes introduced in the Classical Period (choose 2)?

A focus on balance and reason , A focus on humanism and truth

Question 1

Historians generally consider the Renaissance to be a cultural and intellectual bridge between which two eras?

the Middle Ages and the modern era

Question 2

The Renaissance triggered the rise of \_____\_ literature that reflected the everyday life of the period.

Vernacular

Question 3

Which of the following figures from the Renaissance worked in sculpture?

Michelangelo

Question 4

The Renaissance revived \_____________\_.

classical Greek and Roman culture

Question 5

The phrase "To be, or not to be: that is the question" is from which of the following plays?

Hamlet

Question 6

Who initiated the Protestant Reformation?

Martin Luther

Question 7

During the Renaissance, science was regarded as a form of "black magic." True or False?

False

Question 8

What was the principle force for change in Renaissance religion?

reform movements

Question 9

The French word "renaissance" means "\________\_."

rebirth

Question 10

Which of the following is a work from the Renaissance Period?

The Prince by Niccolò Machiavelli

Question 1

Match each of the following works to its description:

• A. Sculpture emphasizing the renewed learning from classical sources that focused on ideal human forms.

A. Michelangelo's David	• B. Renaissance political dissertation on government that advocates the idea that the end justifies the means.

• C. A work of Reformation art, this watercolor signifies an interest in the natural world, depicting the subject in fine detail with almost photographic accuracy.

D. Madrigals	• D. Unaccompanied vocal works that employed the polyphonic use of 3-6 voices and were secular in nature.

• E. Dialogue that emphasized how members of a Renaissance court could portray their own unique personalities and self-fashioning.

E. The Courtier

B. The Prince

C. Young Hare (Durer)

Question 2

Which TWO of the following were true of society during the Renaissance period:

Religious reformers such as Martin Luther split with the Catholic church, ultimately resulting in the formation of Protestantism

Many intellectuals broadened their perspectives beyond Church teachings after the discovery and spread of previously "lost" Classical writings.

Question 3

Which of the following was emphasized by Renaissance humanism?

Humanists sought to educate the whole person, including the physical, intellectual, and spiritual aspects of human beings.

Question 4

What theme from the Renaissance is shown in this painting?

School of Athens

Classicism

Question 5

How is Leonardo's Mona Lisa representative of Renaissance painting?

Mona Lisa.

It treats its subject with realistic detail and perspective.

Question 6

How does the following speech from Shakespeare's Hamlet reflect the themes of the Renaissance?

"What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an Angel! In apprehension how like a god! The beauty of the world! The paragon of animals!"

The speech reflects the values of humanism by emphasizing the power of learning and an individual's use of it.

Question 7

What was Martin Luther's role in advocating Christian doctrine during the Renaissance? Martin Luther was a priest and theologian who challenged papal infallibility.

Question 8

Which of the following is NOT an example of Cultural Exchange in the Renaissance?

Egyptian idiograms influenced European sculptors with their symmetrical forms.

Question 9

Which of the following is an example of a "Renaissance man or woman"?

A successful business person who plays the clarinet, rides horses competitively, and publishes articles on scientific and artistic topics.

Question 10

How did advancements in science lead to innovations in other disciplines during the Renaissance period?

Scientific knowledge about human physiology created greater understanding of how the human eye perceives light and distance, which led painters to experiment with techniques of perspective and chiaroscuro.

Question 11

Which of the following literary devices were popular during the Renaissance?(Choose Two)

a. Soliloquy, in which a character speaks aloud to himself on stage, giving the audience access to his inner thoughts.

Blank verse, which is poetic verse written in unrhymed iambic pentameter.

Question 12

Who wrote the satirical essay, In Praise of Folly, which criticized the corruption and abuses of Catholic doctrine in parts of the Roman Catholic Church?

Erasmus

Question 13

How does art from the Renaissance illustrate cultural exchange and diversity? (Choose 2)

Renaissance artists such as the glassmakers in Italy received inspiration from Muslim artisanal glassware.

Carved ivory from Africa was featured in the homes of European royalty during the Renaissance.

Question 1

Which of the following individuals was NOT an Enlightenment philosopher?

Leonardo Bruni

Question 2

The Age of Enlightenment was also called \_______\_.

the Age of Reason

Question 3

Which of the following images is from the Neoclassical Period?

Question 4

The classical movement in music falls between which two periods?

The Baroque and Romantic Periods

Question 5

The music of the Neoclassical Period differed from Baroque music in that \_______\_.

it featured more variety in orchestral texture

Question 6

Which one of the following statements about Neoclassical theater is true?

It featured intricate and elaborate costumes and sets.

Question 7

Which of the following composers was a classical composer?

Mozart

Question 8

Neoclassicism perpetuated the lavish, ornate aesthetic of the Baroque Period. True or False?

False

Question 9

Of the following artists, who worked within the Neoclassical movement?

Angelica Kauffmann

Question 10

Enlightenment thinking valued all of the following EXCEPT \_________\_.

Mysticism

Question 1

Match the following work to its description:

• A. Painting by Jacques-Louis David that shows three brothers swearing their allegiance to Rome and that became an inspiration for French revolutionaries.

C. Tartuffe	• B. A 35-volume compilation of human knowledge that is viewed as one of the crowning achievements of Enlightenment thinking.

• C. A play by Moliere that utilizes satire to expose hypocrisy and offer religious and social criticism.

D. Symphony No. 101 in D Major	• D. Musical composition by Haydn in which the strings create a rhythmic sound that imitates a ticking clock.

• E. Jonathan Swift's satire of human nature.

B. Encyclopédie

E. Gulliver's Travels

A. Oath of the Horatii

Question 2

Which of the following statements would a Deist philosopher during the Enlightenment subscribe to?

A Deist would believe that God created the universe and decreed its order.

Question 3

Which of the following philosophical approaches relies on direct observation and experimentation?

Empiricism

Question 4

Which of the following statements is true of Classical music?

It coincided with the Neoclassical movement in the visual arts and emphasized lyrical melodies over more homophonic texture.

Question 5

How did slave narratives, such as The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, affect cultural exchange and diversity within the Enlightenment period?

Social progress was aided through realistic depictions of the living conditions of slaves.

Question 6

How does the Neoclassical Period influence contemporary culture?

Contemporary political satire, including shows like The Daily Show, traces its roots to the use of political satire in the Neoclassical Period.

Question 7

Which of the following are major themes of the Enlightenment? (Choose all that apply)

Deism,  Empiricism, Order

Question 8

Why is Voltaire's novel Candide a significant work from the Enlightenment?

It is skeptical of philosophers who believe this is the best of all possible worlds

Question 9

Why is Jacques-Louis David's painting The Death of Marat typical of the Neoclassical style? (Select two)

• It uses sharp, clean lines and chiaroscuro. The figure has a sculpted quality, inspired by Classical statues.

Question 10

How did the rise of capitalism affect cultural exchange in the Enlightenment?

The rise of capitalism helped to increase the exchange of information, allowing intellectuals to form new opinions rather than relying on the bias of tradition.

Question 11

Why did many Enlightenment thinkers reject slavery?

They embraced the dignity of individual human reason and thought, regardless of racial background.

Question 12

Which of the following are characteristic uses of political satire? (Choose 1)

To criticize and entertain

Question 13

Which of the following statements about philosophical works in the Enlightenment is false?

Jean-Jacques Rousseau's theory of the "noble savage" placed the burden of educating Native Americans on the upper class and nobility.

Question 14

How do themes of the Enlightenment contrast with themes of the Renaissance Period? (Choose Two)

The Enlightenment valued the order and clarity of classical art, while the Renaissance Period focused on the classical ideas of humanism. The Enlightenment embraced Deism's understanding of God as a grand architect, while the Renaissance Period explored Catholic and Protestant teachings.

Question 1

Which one of the following works was written by Mary Shelley?

Frankenstein

Question 2

Which figure from Greek mythology featured in Romantic works is a symbol of freedom and rebellion?

Prometheus

Question 3

Romantic architecture in England revived the \_____\_ movement.

Gothic

Question 4

Which of the following statements regarding Romantic opera is true?

Romantic operas embraced themes of heroism and nationalism.

Question 5

Gothic literature evoked horror and often featured sinister, ambitious, and self-serving heroes.

Question 6

Exoticism refers to the glorification of distant, foreign cultures and people.

Question 7

Which of the following signaled the shift from agriculture-based economy to one centered around industrialization, mechanized labor, and urbanization?

Industrial Revolution

Question 8

Which of the following is a unique trait of the Romantic hero?

Romantic heroes are sometimes misunderstood as they follow their personal passion.

Question 9

\_______\_ is an example of a profound event in the Romantic Period that had an impact on a country's national identity.

The French Revolution

Question 10

Which of the following figures is an English Romantic poet?

Percy Bysshe Shelley

Question 1

Match the work with the description:

E. Moby Dick	• A. A Gothic novel in which a scientist, in pursuit of ultimate knowledge, brings a corpse to life.

• B. A poem in free verse that explores the speakerâ€™s connection to humanity and to nature

D. The Raven	• C. A first-person account that documents the inhumanity and human rights abuses enacted by slavery, which helped to gather support for the abolitionist movement.

B. Leaves of Grass	• D. A Gothic poem that represents the speakerâ€™s persistent grief over the death of his beloved.

A. Frankenstein	• E. An epic novel set on the high seas that recounts one manâ€™s futile quest to dominate nature.

C. The Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass

Question 2

Which of the following are themes of the Romantic period (Pick 3)?

Exoticism

Nationalism

Passion

Question 3

Which of the following best describes the role of nature in the Romantic Period (choose 2)?

Nature was seen as a source of inspiration, and Romantic artists sought to represent the majesty and wisdom of nature in their works.

Nature was seen as emotionally evocative and sublime and was used as a source of artistic inspiration.

Question 4

Which of the following best describes the Byronic hero?

The Byronic hero is an intense and passionate figure who often defies authority and rebels against social conformity.

Question 5

Which sentence best describes Transcendentalism?

A rejection of Empiricism and an emphasis on nature as a source of inspiration.

Question 6

How does the painting Saturn Devouring his Son (1819-1823) by Francisco de Goya exemplify the characteristics of Romantic art?

It draws upon myth to explore irrationality, superstition, and the dark side of artistic creativity.

Question 7

Which of the following is true of architecture during the Romantic period? (select 2)

The architects of the Romantic Period embraced the Gothic Revival, a movement celebrating the religiosity of older Gothic buildings.

The architects of the Romantic Period experimented with different building materials, such as iron, steel, and glass.

Question 8

How does Chopin's Nocturne Opus 27, Number 1 display characteristics of Romantic period music?

The piece has drastic tempo changes and shifts in mood that evoke strong changes in emotion.

Question 9

Which Romantic theme is reflected in the following excerpt from William Wordsworth's The Prelude?

OH there is blessing in this gentle breeze,

A visitant that while it fans my cheek

Doth seem half-conscious of the joy it brings

From the green fields, and from yon azure sky.

Whate'er its mission, the soft breeze can come

To none more grateful than to me; escaped

From the vast city, where I long had pined

A discontented sojourner: now free,

Free as a bird to settle where I will.

Nature as a source of solace and inspiration.

Exoticism and an interest in foreign lands.

Question 10

Which of the following is true of Beethoven's Symphony No. 9 in D minor, Op. 125?

It is longer and more dramatic than prior symphonies and utilizes many musicians, including vocalists.

Question 11

What influenced cultural exchange and diversity in the Romantic period?

Exoticism in art and literature reflected the fascination Europeans had with non-Western cultures.

Question 12

American composers of hymns and church music were inspired by which of the following during the Romantic period?

They looked abroad for inspiration, drawing from the works of the great Classical composers of Europe.

Question 13

Which musical technique popular in the Romantic period is still used in contemporary music today?

Chromaticism

Question 14

Which American patriotic song had its roots in the Romantic period?

"Star-Spangled Banner"

Question 15

How do the themes of the Romantic Period contrast with the themes of the Neoclassical Period? (select 2)

The themes of the Romantic Period are influenced by revolution and nationalism whereas the themes of the Neoclassical Period are influenced by advancements in science, philosophy, and politics.

The themes of the Romantic Period reflect the importance of nature as a source of wisdom and beauty whereas the themes of the Neoclassical Period reflect a rational and scientific exploration of the nature.

Question 1

Which of the following developments MOST contributed to the rise of Realist literature?

The Industrial Revolution

Question 2

Which of the following movements lured immigrants and farmworkers to American cities in the second half of the 19th century?

Industrialism

Question 3

Realism was a movement that took place about 50 years after Romanticism ended.

False

Question 4

Which of the following informed Realism's depiction of nature?

Darwinism

Question 5

Scientific materialism is the philosophical view that the only reality that exists is the one that can be seen through the natural sciences.

Question 6

Which of the following was developed during the 19th century and contributed to Realism's desire for accurate portrayal of reality?

Photography

Question 7

Which of the following philosophies argues that ethical decisions must be made for the greater good?

Utilitarianism

Question 8

Charles Dickens was a Realist author known for depicting the grimness of the Industrial Revolution in England, his native country.

Question 9

One chief concern that Realist playwrights shared with Realist authors and artists was \_______\_.

showing likeness to life

Question 10

Which of the following musical styles was composer John Philip Sousa best known for?

Military march

Question 1

Match the work with the description:

• A. Set in New Orleans, this novel tells the story of an artistic and sensitive woman who struggles against the limitations and expectations placed on her gender.

C. On the Origin of Species	• B. This novel examines race relations and follows the story of a young boy and a runaway slave who travel down the Mississippi river on a raft.

B. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn	• C. This work presents the theory of evolution, which shows that species evolve over time by way of natural selection.

• D. A novel that explicitly critiques the philosophy of Utilitarianism by depicting the hypocrisy of the rich, the plight of the poor, and the gritty realities of industrialization.

E. War and Peace	• E. This epic novel draws from letters, journals, and other historical reports and examines the Napoleonic invasion of Russia in 1812 through the eyes of five aristocratic Russian families.

(A) D. The Awakening

(D) A. Hard Times

Question 2

Which of the following themes were rejected by the Realist period?

Mysticism

The Sublime

Question 3

French painter Gustave Courbet once said: "I have never seen angels. Show me an angel and I will paint one." Which philosophical approach from the Realist period does this quotation express?

Scientific Materialism

Question 4

Which of the following was a major artistic innovation during the Realist period?

The invention of photography

Question 5

Which of the following best describes Realist theater of the late 19th-century?

The plays attempted to accurately depict ordinary life, using everyday vocabulary and exploring moral problems that would be relevant to audience members of the time.

Question 6

Which of the following best represents the beliefs and writings of 19th-century philosopher, John Stuart Mill?

Mill believed that governments should intervene only when necessary to ensure the greater good and that women should have access to education and be given the right to vote.

Question 7

Which of the following Realist authors is best remembered for works that addressed social inequalities and the struggles of the working class in 19th century England?

Charles Dickens

Question 8

Why is Henry Ossawa Tanner's painting, The Thankful Poor, a significant work of the Realist Period?

Tanner's painting is widely regarded as a classic portrayal of African American dignity, and it enables viewers to relate emotionally to the man and the boy.

.

Question 9

Which of the following are true of composer Claude Debussy?

Debussy experimented with unusual scale patterns, including scales from Eastern Asian music.

Question 10

Which late 19th-century art movements were inspired by the ancient traditions of Japanese woodblock painting?

Impressionism

Art Nouveau

Post-Impressionism

Question 11

The following image of Van Gogh's Courtesan reflects what movement in the Realist Period?

Japonisme

Question 12

Which of the following philosophies from the Realist period still influence political systems in the present day?

Marxism

Question 13

In what ways is the Realist philosophy of Utilitarianism still relevant in present-day America?

The Utilitarian emphasis on the greatest good for the greatest number is reflected in many of our environmental policies, which work to safeguard our environment so as to protect our natural resources and ensure the overall health of society.

Question 14

How do themes of the Realist Period differ from the themes of the Romantic Period?

Nature is treated with deep scientific and material interest in the Realist period, while in the Romantic period, nature is valued for its aesthetic function, in which it is often seen as a rich source of artistic inspiration.

The Realists emphasize individualism by examining how individuals make complicated moral choices within the context of a larger society, while in Romanticism, the individual is often celebrated for being rebellious and rejecting social conventions.

# Feedback

- "Throughout human history there have been many inventions that have come and gone--many discoveries--some more impactful than others. Three inventions that altered the way that we live, and the way that we go about our business, are the printing press, electricity, and the Internet."
- "There are three themes that affected not just a single period; they are powerful enough that they have, historically, required revisiting and reimagining. These themes, individualism, revolution, and classicism, tell us something about the values central to the Western world."
- "Themes are unifying ideas that are repeated or developed throughout a literary or artistic work."
- "Myths are traditional stories of a people or culture that serve to explain some natural phenomenon, the origin of humanity, or customs or religious rites. Humans can pass on their visions, values, and memories from generation to generation through myths. These myths often offer practical and spiritual wisdom in addition to providing entertainment."
- "Philosophy's object is the pursuit of wisdom about the nature of these matters. Critical inquiry and reasoned argument generally distinguish it."
- "For example, The Bayeux Tapestry from the Middle Ages functioned as political propaganda when it was created (and still does today)."
  \-"For our purpose, we will define the Humanities as a study of the various ways people, in all times past and present and in all places around the world, live out the human experience. Humans have engaged in religion, philosophy, literature, music, art, language, and history to better comprehend and describe our world."
- "Two examples of recurring universal themes* in the Humanities include love and the hero. Although you won't see these called out specifically on the previous page, in terms of "core" themes for the periods, you will see these called out multiple times as you begin to analyze art from each period. Love and the figure of the hero, then, tell us about two shared human principles in the Western world."
- "Wilson's idea of 'consilience,' which he defines as a 'jumping together' of knowledge by the linking of facts and fact-based theory across disciplines to create a common groundwork of explanation, is today still being explored for its powerful contribution to the world of Humanities study in universities and colleges around the world."
- "...humanism was never an intellectual heritage or pattern exclusive to the West. History instructs us that a humanist tradition also emerged in the nonwestern world. Ancient China's culture, for example, reflected perspectives from Confucianism and Buddhism that were not unlike those found in Western humanism."
- "We live in a global economy. Studying the Humanities can help us develop a better understanding of other cultures and worldviews. Exploring the human condition and how people throughout history have faced the challenges of life can help us when we face our own challenges."
- : "This profound distinction gave the formal arts a construct for expressing the duality of love (physical passion versus love of soul, lust versus spiritual desire) that nearly all cultures recognize. It opened art, literature, and theater to exploring erotic subject matter. And it lent the framework in which philosophers developed the concept of an idealized and exalted spiritual love that transcends passion."
- "The hero's journey archetype has been termed a monomyth (a phrase popularized by the scholar of mythology Joseph Campbell) because the trajectory of the hero's quest or journey is fundamentally the same everywhere."
- Oedipus Rex was written by Sophocles.
- Homer wrote The Iliad one of the first epics in the Western tradition.
- Greek construction was based on post-and-lintel, two upright supports with a horizontal beam across.
- The Greek building most revered for its use of ratio and perspective is the Parthenon.
- Greek plays were generally shown in an amphitheater.
- The Pantheon was the largest single span dome for centuries after it was built.
- The shadows represent everyday life that contains misinformation and illusions.
- Polytheism is the belief in multiple gods or a religion based on more than one god. Both Roman and Greek civilizations were polytheistic.
- Ancient Greeks developed democracy, a form of government in which the people have the power to vote and make decisions.
- Classical drama consisted of tragedies, comedies, and satyr plays.
- The correct answers are 1 = b, 2 = d, 3 = c, 4 = a, 5 = e. See sections 2.05, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, and 2.13. Make note of how the descriptions provided fit with the major themes of the period, sometimes more than one.
- Sappho's lyric poem follows the tradition of Greek lyric poetry by providing the perspective of personal experience in a language that is more intimate than Greek epic poetry.
- The Metropolitan Kouros (circa 590-580 BCE) shows the balance of vertical and horizontal symmetry admired by the Greeks.
- The ancient Greeks developed many key ideas in both philosophy and science.
- Athens, a Greek city-state, developed the first democracy whereby citizens could vote on the laws and public offices directly. Rome originated as a small city-state; it grew into a world empire and followed a republican form of government.
- For the Greeks, art and architecture served to promote religion, present beauty, and glorify society, but was especially oriented toward honoring the gods. Roman art and architecture focuses primarily on imperial themes of power, military victory, and heroism. The Greeks relied on post-and-lintel construction while the Romans utilized columns and arches to design much larger buildings.
- Greek philosophers questioned ancient religious myths and examined right and wrong from a human perspective. Aristotle sought to understand the qualities leading to human excellence and good living.
- The Egyptians influenced Greek sculpture and artistic motifs. The Greeks also borrowed the alphabet of the Phoenicians.
- The Mediterranean Sea is known as the hub of western civilization because it facilitated the exchange of goods and ideas in southern Europe, western Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. The Silk Road carried religious beliefs as well as goods between the East and the West.
- The Classical Period influences both the American political system and American federal architecture.
- The main character's journey home from prison draws from the classical epic The Odyssey, including many of the obstacles that he faces.
- Plato believed that to act in one's self interest was an aspect of human nature, so his notion of an ideal state was one in which a philosopher-king ruled based on reason and justice to secure the welfare of the majority.
- Aristotle said that the aim of humans is to be good and find happiness, and that reason is necessary for humans to resolve the conflict between the rational and irrational parts of the soul. He also argued that the individual can create a virtuous character by achieving balance using the Golden Mean.
- Music was an integral part of Greek celebrations, including athletic competitions. These hymns honor the god Apollo and reflect polytheism in the period.
- Major themes of the Classical Period are balance, truth and reason, Democracy and Republic, polytheism, and Humanism.
- Historians generally consider the Renaissance to be a cultural and intellectual bridge from the Middle Ages to the modern era.
- The Renaissance triggered the rise of vernacular literature that reflected the everyday life of the period. During the Renaissance, "vernacular" referred to the domestic or native language of the people, as opposed to the classical Greek and Latin of the period.
- Michelangelo was a sculptor as well as a painter. The other figures are authors.
- The Renaissance revived elements of classical Greek and Roman culture.
- The line is from Hamlet, a tragedy that explores the themes of treachery, revenge, incest, and moral corruption.
- Martin Luther initiated the Protestant Reformation and openly criticized the Catholic Church's practice of selling indulgences, which allowed people to pay for forgiveness.
- This is a false statement. Science was regarded as a legitimate source of knowledge. Increasing interest in science led to many groundbreaking discoveries, including, for example, how the eye perceives light and distance.
- Reform movements gave rise to the Reformation, the key religious movement in Europe during the Renaissance.
- French word "renaissance" means "rebirth." The term Renaissance is used to describe the historical period from roughly the late 13th to the early 17th century.
- Machiavelli's The Prince, a treatise on how to govern, was published in 1532.
- The most historically significant religious development of the Renaissance was the Protestant Reformation, a movement which began as an attempt to reform the Roman Catholic Church, but eventually created an entirely new Protestant denomination. Renaissance thinkers drew upon classical literary, scientific, and philosophical works to provide additional resources for learning and living.
- "Renaissance humanists called for educating the whole person. They emphasized not only scholarly achievement but also moral and athletic development."
- Classicism is one of the main themes of the Renaissance.
- "There were several notable artistic innovations in Renaissance art, as artists pursued greater realism in their work. Renaissance paintings reflect careful observation of the natural world, particularly the human body. Artists painstakingly studied human anatomy and how the human eye perceives distance and space."
- "The dominant Renaissance cultural and intellectual movement was classical humanism, which emphasized the worth, dignity, and rationality of man."
- "Luther denounced systemic corruption in the Church hierarchy. He challenged the doctrine of papal infallibility and rejected the Catholic Church as a necessary intermediary between the faithful and God."
- See section 3.15 for information about the importance of Silk Road, the development of the Spanish viola da gamba, and presence of carved ivory in the Renaissance period.
- "[Renaissance person] refers to someone who has multiple talents in various disciplines, who has mastered classical and contemporary languages and feels at home in various cultures—and not necessarily Western cultures only."
- "The merging of art and science was an important Renaissance development. The artist's application of mathematics and optics to achieve perspective in works of art exemplified this."
- Renaissance works employed complex language and literary devices to convey their themes. Shakespeare used blank verse as well as soliloquy to enhance the aesthetic interest and drama of his works.
- "Erasmus's best-known work was In Praise of Folly, a satirical essay that criticized corruption and abuses of Catholic doctrine in parts of the Roman Catholic Church."
- Renaissance artists were inspired by Muslim glassware and carved ivory from Africa was prized by European royalty.
- Leonardo Bruni was a Renaissance philosopher. John Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Denis Diderot were all Enlightenment philosophers.
- The Age of Enlightenment was also called the Age of Reason.
- The image is Oath of the Horatii by Jacques-Louis David from the Neoclassical Period. Image a is Rembrandt van Rijn's Self-Portrait, and Image c is Caravaggio's Supper at Emmaus, both from the Baroque Period of art.
- The classical movement in music falls between the Baroque and Romantic Periods.
- Music of the Neoclassical Period featured more variety in orchestral texture than Baroque music and reflected the Enlightenment focus on balance, order, and structural clarity.
- Neoclassical theater featured intricate and elaborate costumes and sets.
- Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was a classical composer.
- Neoclassicism rejected the ostentatious displays of Baroque works and embraced harmony and balance.
- Angelica Kauffmann was one of the few prominent female Neoclassical artists.
- Enlightenment thinking valued rationalism, progress and clarity. For Enlightenment philosophers, reason, rational thinking, and observation were key to uncovering philosophical truths.
- A Deist would believe that God created the universe, but that he does not interfere with the order he created.
- Empiricism uses direct observation and experimentation to obtain knowledge.
- Classical music was produced in the Enlightenment Period, coinciding with the Neoclassical movement in the visual arts. It emphasized lyrical melodies over more homophonic texture.
- Cultural exchange and diversity were aided by first-hand accounts of becoming enslaved, the experience of slavery, and seeking freedom.
- Satires were popular in the Neoclassical Period and continue to be used for didactic purposes.
- Enlightenment thinkers were often Deists, those who believed in a more distant, impersonal god. They also believed in empiricism, learning through observation and experimentation, and in the order of the universe.
- Voltaire was famous for writing witty satires of the social and political practices of his day. Candide features a philosopher who, despite terrible misfortunes, continues to believe this is the best of all possible worlds.
- David is considered one of the preeminent Neoclassical painters and his paintings have sharp colors and chiaroscuro (the contrast of light and dark to create depth) and c. the human figures in his paintings appear sculptural in nature, as in the painting above.
- Cultural exchange and diversity were important in achieving individualized thought and challenging tradition. The rise of capitalism facilitated the increasing exchange of information, and this access to varied information led to a stronger sense of self-awareness. With a wide and varied cultural knowledge base, intellectuals of the period were able to turn to the power of their minds to form opinions rather than the biased influence of tradition.
- Enlightenment thinkers saw each human being as possessing a universal capacity for reason and independent thought. Therefore, each person possessed human dignity, meaning that slavery could only unjustly prevent someone from exercising their right to freedom of mind and body.
- Satire both criticizes a practice or person and entertains the audience.
- A. Both periods looked to the classical heritage, but they emphasized different aspects. The Renaissance focused on the humanism of the Classical Period. The Enlightenment period valued the order and clarity they saw in classical art and architecture.  The Renaissance saw the division of Christianity into Catholicism and Protestantism. The Enlightenment developed the concept of Deism, the idea of God who designed the universe and natural laws but does not intervene in daily life.
- Mary Shelley wrote the novel Frankenstein.
- Romantic artists and writers saw Prometheus as a symbol of freedom because he was willing to challenge the established order of the gods.
- Romantic architecture began the Gothic Revival movement in England. The movement featured homes with Gothic veneers and churches and public buildings built as Gothic structures.
- Romantic opera employed themes of heroism and nationalism.
- Gothic literature emphasized the flawed nature of man and his potential for destruction rather than progress, often evoking horror through setting, narrative, and character.
- Exoticism was an artistic trend in the 19th century that glorified and borrowed from distant, foreign cultures, often misrepresenting those cultures.
- From the middle of the 18th century to the middle of the 19th century, Europe, and especially Britain, saw tremendous industrial growth as a result of advances in technology and science, which became known as the Industrial Revolution.
- The Romantic (or Byronic) hero is an exceptional and gifted loner, perhaps misunderstood, who was driven to follow personal passion rather than traditional societal expectations.
- The French Revolution is an example of a profound event during the Romantic Period that had an impact on France's national identity.
- Percy Bysshe Shelley is considered one of the founding figures of the British Romantic movement. His poems include "Ode to the West Wind" (1819), which highlights the power of nature, and "Ozymandias" (1817), which details the perspective of an Egyptian King.
- Make note of how the descriptions provided fit with the major themes of the period, sometimes more than one.
- The Romantic period focused on emotion, imagination, and individuality, which include a sense of nationalism, a fascination with exoticism, a tendency toward revolutionary ideas and heroism, and a focus on the power and beauty of nature.
- The Romantic period saw a renewed interest in nature, but while the Enlightenment focused on nature from a scientific standpoint, the Romantics approached it from an emotional point of view and emphasized the beauty, power, and sublimity of nature.
- The Byronic hero represents the themes of freedom, individualism, imagination, and genius, but he is also a flawed character whose intense passions and convictions often lead him to defy social conventions.
- Transcendentalists looked to nature as a source of inspiration.
- The painting by Goya epitomizes the Romantic preoccupation with the gothic themes of horror, fear, mystery, and the supernatural.
- The architects of the Romantic Period reacted against the clean Neoclassical style and embraced Gothic Revival and experimented with building materials such as iron, steel, and glass.
- While the melody has moments of calm, it also has sharp, discordant notes and a drastic tempo change that quickly evoke unease.
- Many Romantics found solace and inspiration in the natural world, the beauty and purity of which stood in stark contrast to stress and strife symbolized by "the vast city."
- Beethoven's Symphony No. 9 in D minor, Op. 125 was the first to utilize soloists and a choir. It is also referred to as the first truly Romantic symphony with all of the passion and emotion it evokes.
- "Exoticism," or the interest in non-Western cultures, caused artists of the Romantic period to look outside of their own experience for ideas and inspiration.
- American composers were influenced by the Classical music of European
  composers.
- Chromaticism is the movement or displacement of notes by a half-step, which results in music that sounds emotionally unsettled. This musical technique is still used in the present day.
- Adapted from a poem written in 1814, "The Star-Spangled Banner" was adopted by the U.S. Congress in 1931 as the official national anthem.
- The themes of the Romantic Period are influenced by the many revolutions of the time as well, as a sense of nationalism. They also reflect the importance of nature as a force of inspiration and source of wisdom and beauty. On the other hand, the Neoclassical Period was driven by advancements related to reason and science.
- The Industrial Revolution that led to urbanization prompted many Realist authors to be concerned about certain social issues.
- Industrialism lured immigrants and farmworkers to American cities and a new way of life. Inventions such as the cotton gin and sewing machine boosted production in factories and provided a promising source of jobs in cities such as New York and Boston.
- Realism overlapped with Romanticism chronologically, taking place during roughly the same period. It was simply a different aesthetic.
- Darwin's empirical proof of natural selection impacted Realists' view of nature.
- Scientific materialism posits that no other reality exists but the one that can be seen through the natural sciences.
- Photography was developed in the 19th century and allowed for more accurate visual representation.
- Utilitarianism is a philosophy that promotes the maximum happiness for the greatest number of people, and decisions should be made with the greater good in mind.
- Charles Dickens was English, and his novels are well known for their bleak depiction of the Industrial Revolution's effect on England's economy and social classes.
- Like other Realists, playwrights of this period believed that likeness to life, or an honest representation of theatrical situations, dialogue, and setting, would allow audiences to relate more intimately with the drama.
- John Philip Sousa, an American composer who served in the U.S. Marine Corps, wrote many military and patriotic parade marches.
- The Realist period rejected Romanticism's interest in the mystical and the idealization of nature in the sublime. Instead, they were preoccupied with solving the growing social problems associated with rapid industrialization and urbanization, problems that undercut their sense of certainty in progress and continued prosperity. They were also heavily influenced by new discoveries in the natural sciences, such as Charles Darwin's theory of evolution.
- In this quote, Courbet rejects the idea that he can paint something he has not seen. Scientific materialism promotes the view that nothing exists unless it can be verified through observation and experimentation. As such, scientific materialist do not accept ideas that rely on faith or mysticism.
- In 1839, Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre invented the "daguerreotype" a process that used silver plated copper and chemicals to create photographic images. Photography soon became an important medium in art, journalism, and science, and by the late 1850s, daguerreotypes were replaced by cheaper, faster photographic processes.
- In the last half of the 19th-century, Realist theater, like Realist literature, emphasized the accurate depiction of ordinary life on the stage. For the playwrights of the time, theater was meant to hold a mirror up to the world. Dialogue, costumes, props and sets were meant to mimic real-life behaviors and settings, so audiences had the experience of looking into the characters' lives, homes, and minds. This created intimacy between the audience and the characters, so the audience could then relate to moral and social questions presented by the drama.
- John Stuart Mill promoted the philosophy of Utilitarianism, arguing that the proper course of political action is that which ensures the greatest good for the greatest number. He was a proponent of liberal political thought and also spoke in favor of expanding educational and political rights for women.
- While all four of these Realist authors' works dealt with issues of social inequality, only Englishman Charles Dickens' specifically engage with the struggles of working classes in 19th century London.
- Tanner was one of the first African American artists to rise to international fame, and this painting was widely regarded for portraying African Americans with dignity, allowing viewers to empathize with the elderly man and boy praying
- Debussy was fond of unusual scale patterns, including those from Eastern Asian music and the pentatonic scale that utilized 5 notes instead of the traditional 8.
- The traditions of Japanese woodblock painting from the late 1600s inspired the new art movements of Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and Art Nouveau. In the late 19th century, artists across Europe incorporated elements of the Japanese woodblock prints into their own creations.
- Japonisme is the name of the movement influenced by Japanese art in the 19th century.
- Core aspects of Marxist ideology are still influential in many parts of the world today. Darwinism is a theme from the Realist period that is also relevant in the present day, but it is not considered to be a political system.
- The philosophy of Utilitarianism informs our efforts to protect the environment as a means to ensure the overall happiness and well-being of the populace.
- Nature is viewed objectively in the Realist period, and the lived experience of individuals is explored in minute and candid detail in Realist art and literature. The Industrial Revolution is a driving economic force in the Romantic period, and the effects of industrialization continue to be a main concern in the Realist period. Moreover, the Realists rejected the Romantic preoccupation with the supernatural in favor of scientific materialism.

# Terms

TERMS

Philosopher King - A hypothetical ruler, or Guardian, of Plato's ideal city-state.

Post and lintel - Classical Greek architectural design that features two upright posts supporting a crossbeam called a lintel.

Hellenic - A synonym for Greek.

Democracy - Government of direct rule by the people, a form developed by the Greeks.

Socratic Method - Analytical method of reasoning developed by Greek philosopher Socrates that asks a progression of questions in pursuit of the truth.

Humanism - The study of the creative and intellectual contributions of all human cultures.

Hubris - Greek word for excessive pride, presumption or arrogance (originally toward the gods).

Allegory of the Cave - Plato's extended metaphor in The Republic that contrasts the way in which most humans perceive reality and Plato's idea of the true form of reality.

Canon - A set of rules developed by the Greek artist Polykleitos for creating perfect proportionality in the human figure.

Skepticism - A philosophy that maintains that there can be no certainty in human knowledge and that mankind should continually be involved with finding the truth.

Doric order - The simplest of the classical Greek architectural styles, featuring unadorned columns with no base.

The Forms - Plato's concept that there are ideal essences (the Forms) of objects or things.

Catharsis - The purging of a spectator's strong emotions through experiencing tragedy; one of Aristotle's concepts.

Kouros - Type of statue featuring life-sized male nudes in a stance in which the left foot is placed in front of the right.

Capital - The top part of a column between the shaft of the column and the entablature.

Pediment - The triangular upper part of the front of a building in the classical style.

Republic - Government where supreme power rests in the body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by representatives chosen directly or indirectly.

Classicism - Aesthetic attitudes and principles found in the art, architecture, and literature of ancient Greece and Rome.

Lyre - A string instrument like a U-shaped harp known for its use by the classical Greeks.

Entablature - The horizontal layers of material of a building that are supported by columns or walls.

Polytheism - The belief in multiple gods; religion based on more than one god.

Diction - Word-choice; can be classified as formal or informal, or denotative or connotative.

Epic - A long poem recounting in elevated style the deeds of a legendary hero; any narrative work (novel, drama, film) dealing with epic themes.

Muses - Goddesses of inspiration for literature, art, and science.

Golden Mean - Aristotle's term for the desirable middle between two extremes, between excess and inadequacy.

Frieze - A broad horizontal band of sculpted or painted decoration, usually on a wall near the ceiling.

Expansion of University - A major part of this theme is epistemology, or the study of knowledge and belief. Thanks to epistemology, more people sought knowledge for personal fulfillment, and the need for trained professionals in society grew.

Humanism - One of the themes of the Classical Period that experienced a resurgence during the Renaissance, this idea celebrated the intellectual contributions made by all human cultures.

Individualism - Rather than defer to God, men and women of the Renaissance preferred to craft their own identities and celebrate their differences on a philosophical level.

Rationalism - One of the most important ideals that defined humanism and the Renaissance was the power of the human brain to study, learn, and understand the world.

Rebirth of Classicism - During the Renaissance, the glorification of God and the Church that was so prevalent in the Middle Ages was supplemented by themes of learning, politics, literature, art, social life, and music.

Reformation - The religious movement of the 16th century that sought to reform the Catholic Church that resulted in the creation of the Protestant Church.

The Prince

• This political treatise was dedicated to Lorenzo de'Medici in the hopes that he would rise to restore Italy to its previous honor and pride.

• One of the major themes addressed in this work was the importance of the political state over the religious state.

• The most important part of this treatise is the chapter in which Machiavelli reinforces the distinction between being a good person and pretending to be a good person.

The Courtier

• This work utilizes the technique of a Renaissance dialogue, a literary form that incorporates elements of drama, conversation, philosophy, and essay.

• The major themes touched upon in this work were Individualism and Self-Fashioning.

• In this work by Castilglione, a group of attendees at the court of Duke Urbino compete with each other to describe desirable personal qualities.

Hamlet

• This play explores death as a theme in a very different way than the ancient Greeks and Romans did.

• Mirroring is a prominent theme.

Doctor Faustus

• Written by Marlowe

• Strongly reflects Reformation beliefs.

• Uses allegory.

Renaissance Man - A term describing an individual with broad knowledge and versatile talents spanning many intellectual and artistic disciplines.

Renaissance - A period in Western history, from the 14th through the 16th centuries, marked by a revival of interest in the culture of Greco-Roman antiquity and a flourishing of artistic and intellectual achievement.

classical humanism - The cultural movement of the Renaissance, based on Greek and Roman classic literature, that emphasized the dignity, worth, and rationality of humankind.

Age of Exploration - Time period between the early fifteenth to the early seventeenth centuries when Europeans sailed around the globe and transferred goods, food, plants, and people (in the form of slaves) transforming the countries they reached.

Epistemology - The study of thinking.

Dialect - A form of language which is particular to a group of people, such as those belonging to a region or social class

In Praise of Folly - A satirical essay written by Desiderius Erasmus (1466-1536) in which he criticizes the abuses and corruption of Catholic doctrine in parts of the Catholic Church.

Iconoclasm - The deliberate destruction of religious art, imagery, icons, and other symbols or monuments.

Rationalism - A point of view that emphasizes the role of reason, over the senses, in gaining knowledge.

Reformation art - Art movement of the 16th century, largely in Northern Europe, that reflected religious views of Protestant Reformation.

Sonnet - A form of poem that commonly contains 14 lines.

blank verse - Poetry written in a metered fashion, typically iambic pentameter, but which does not rhyme

Protestant Reformation - A religious movement of the 16th century to reform the Roman Catholic Church that resulted in the creation of Protestant churches.

Individualism - That which separates one unique person from another, as well as the social and philosophical viewpoint that celebrates that difference.

The Prince - A political treatise written by Niccolò Machiavelli (1467-1527) in which he claims that the ends justify the means and that those with political power should use whatever advantage they have to keep it and control the populace.

Allegory - A work of art which represents some abstract quality or idea, often religious or political, by means of symbolic representation.

Madrigal - A polyphonic vocal work, usually written for four or five voices, setting a pastoral poem to music, performed without instrumental accompaniment, and intended for secular use.

Chiaroscuro - The creation of the illusion of depth through gradations of light and shade.

Heresy - A challenge to or rejection of the orthodox doctrine of a religion or church.

Martin Luther - German theologian who initiated the Protestant Reformation; argued that salvation is granted on the basis of faith rather than deeds or works.

self-fashioning - The process of fashioning one's individual sense of self and public persona according to a set of socially acceptable standards.

Humanism - The study of the creative and intellectual contributions of all human cultures.

papal infallibility - Roman Catholic doctrine that the Pope cannot err when he speaks about faith or morality because of divine guidance.

Symmetry - The pleasing or harmonious proportionate arrangement of corresponding parts of an artwork.

Balance - The achievement of putting different areas of the body in dynamic tension with one another.

linear perspective - The creation of the illusion of depth based on the fact that parallel lines or edges appear to converge, and objects appear smaller as the distance between them and a viewer increases.

Maritime - Connected to the sea or seafaring.

Truth - The accurate and genuine reality of the world; that which is indisputably factual.

Silk Road - An overland route from Constantinople to Beijing used in the trade of silks and spices between Europe and the Far East; it was eventually blocked by the Ottoman Empire and travel by sea became more popular.

Prose - Language that flows naturally as opposed to language that conforms to the beat of a rhythm such as in poetry.

Soliloquy - Speech by character in a drama expressing his or her inmost thoughts, heard by the audience but not by any other character.

Denis Diderot	Worked with Jean le Rond d'Alembert to create the Encyclopédie.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau	Believed that a person is at his or her best in wholly natural environments and is corrupted by the environments of society.

John Locke	Published Two Treatises of Government, which paved the way for modern forms of democracy.

Mary Wollstonecraft	Argued that women were capable of rationality and advocated for the advancement and education of women.

Gulliver's Travels

• This work values older, Classical period over modern writing.

• In this work, various aspects of human nature are explored through beings with a variety of physical attributes

• This work is critical of meaningless religious controversies.

Candide

• This work is critical of traditional social and religious institutions.

• In this work, the main character pursues a woman across the narrative. When he finally wins her, she is no longer his ideal.

• This work features a philosopher who is too optimistic.

Deism	The belief that God created the natural laws that govern nature but does not directly intervene or interfere in any way.

Satire	Genre in which human or individual weaknesses or shortcomings are shown by means of ridicule, derision, irony, or other methods, often with the intent to expose or correct.

Chiaroscuro	The creation of the illusion of depth through gradations of light and shade.

Enlightenment	The period in Western history spanning the 17th and 18th centuries, during which a notable shift toward rational thinking and advancement occurred in science, philosophy, society, and politics.

Monophonic	Music that contains only a single part.

Opera	A fully-produced, multi-sectional work for the theater whose text (or libretto) is primarily sung by soloists and a chorus, and which is accompanied by instruments, usually a large orchestra.

Individualism	Individualism is that which separates one unique person from another, as well as the social and philosophical viewpoint that celebrates that difference.

Progress	The steady march of advancements made in certain intellectual areas that allow the human race to develop and grow.

Order	Natural laws that Enlightenment thinkers believed should guide the structure of civilized life.

Philosophes	A term used to refer to French Enlightenment philosophers.

Rationalism	A point of view that emphasizes the role of reason, over the senses, in gaining knowledge.

Neoclassicism	Art movement of 18th century that drew on Greek and Roman art for models of harmony, idealized realism, and reason.

Fortepiano	An early form of the piano originating in the 18th and early 19th centuries and having a smaller range and softer timbre than a modern piano.

Doctrine	The body of beliefs, principles, and values in a knowledge or belief system such as religion.

Empiricism	Philosophical doctrine that says all knowledge is derived from our senses.

Counterpoint	The simplest form of harmony features at least two melodic lines (referred to as voices or parts) of equal value played against one another.

Skepticism	Greek philosophical school that maintained human knowledge was limited and uncertain, and probability of correct morality was enough for acting in a moral fashion. Skepticism also refers to a general attitude of questioning and doubting assertions, and maintaining that the accumulation of evidence is of fundamental importance.

Print

Term	Definition

Exoticism	Many writers used this theme to transport readers to a location which they may never have heard of, let alone visited.

Heroism	The embodiment of this theme was fashioned after Lord Byron. His qualities are listed as: exceptional, misunderstood, and gifted loner, who was driven by passion.

Individualism	The figure that embodied this theme was the imaginative genius.

Nationalism	A variant of patriotism, this theme was a consequence of the Romantic obsession with the figures of creative folk genius.

Nature	Many of the Romantic writers found wisdom and solace in nature and strove to convey this theme to their readers.

Passion	This theme inspired Romantic writers to favor strong sentiments of affection, sorrow, and romantic longing over the rational and logical.

Revolution	Romantic philosophers showed their support for this through their calls for action against tyranny, oppressive social and cultural conditions, and for the equal rights for all people.

Idealism

• The philosophical position that our knowledge of the world can only be grounded in our mental experiences.

• Privileges subjectivity over objectivity

Nationalism

• The philosophical position that states are legitimate if they reflect some natural unity of people based on commonalities like race, language, and culture.

Transcendentalism

• Ralph Waldo Emerson is considered a founding figure of this movement.

• Characterized by a belief that people can become free and self-reliant by returning to nature.

English Romanticism

• The Prelude

• "Ode on a Grecian Urn"

• "The Corsair"

American Romanticism

• Leaves of Grass

• Moby Dick; or the White Whale

The Gothic

• Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus

• Wuthering Heights

• Jane Eyre

Slave Narratives

• The Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave

• Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl

• "Ain't I a Woman?"

Print

idealism	Theory that reality is a mental construction or that the object of external perception consists of ideas.

transcendentalism	Philosophical movement during the Romantic era that emphasized feeling over reason and the role of the individual finding an intuitive relation to the universe through solitude amid nature.

egalitarianism	A belief in promoting social and political equality.

Romantic/Byronic hero	A stereotypical character of a Romantic novel; an exceptional and gifted loner, perhaps misunderstood, who was driven to follow personal passion rather than traditional societal expectations.

individualism	Individualism is that which separates one unique person from another, as well as the social and philosophical viewpoint that celebrates that difference.

Transcendentalist movement	Philosophical movement during the Romantic era that emphasized feeling over reason and the role of the individual finding an intuitive relation to the universe through solitude amid nature.

nationalism	A variant of patriotism characterized by intense loyalty to a particular nation and its defining values and features.

Revolution	A fundamental, dramatic shift in organizational structure that occurs over a short period of time.

colonialism	The political, economic, and cultural domination by one country over another country or region.

chromaticism	The movement or displacement of notes by a half-step, as opposed to the tradition of whole-step movement in previous periods.

Gothic Revival	Romantic-era architectural movement that employed Gothic forms.

passion	The evocation of strong, irrational emotion within an artistic or literary work.

exoticism	An artistic trend that took place in Europe in the 19th century, which borrowed and glorified cultural aspects from non-Western civilizations.

slave narratives	Published accounts of American slaves who related the hardships and injustices of slavery.

sublime	A quality of greatness or vastness that is beyond calculation, comparison, or imitation; often invoked with reference to nature.

Industrial Revolution	The 19th century transition in many countries from an agrarian economy to one dominated by machine manufacturing.

Gothic literature	A literary style popular during the Romantic era that emphasized the flawed nature of man and his potential for destruction rather than progress, often through monstrous heroes and/or sympathetic villains.

Term	Definition

Age of Doubt	A period characterized by both optimism and anxiety. This sense of uncertainty showed an attitude of foreboding about the effects of modernization.

Darwinism	Realists were invested in this theme for its empirical proof of the origin of life; as such, they rejected Romantic idealism and embraced the view that nothing exists but the physical reality that can be seen through the natural sciences.

Individualism	Realists were fixated on portraying as much accurate detail as possible on a singular and personal level, believing that focusing on this theme would best showcase the hard reality they wanted to represent.

Industrialization	The shift away from agararian economy to one dominated by machine manufacturing exposed large gaps between wealthy and working classes, causing Realists to be deeply concerned about how this theme affected economy and social class.

French Realists

• More concerned with documenting the people, places and contemporary social mores of all classes of French society.

• Honoré de Balzac belonged to this group of writers. He found literary success with his collection of fiction titled La Comédie humaine.

English Realists

• Dealt with subjects and characters that were seemingly inconsequential in an upwardly mobile society.

• The most notable author from this group is Charles Dickens

Russian Realists

• One of the most famous authors from this group is Leo Tolstoy whose famous works include Anna Karenina and War and Peace.

American Realists

• The themes explored by these authors included urbanization, industrialization, and the expression of moral and psychic exhaustion caused by the Civil War.

• Mark Twain belonged to this group of writers. His most famous work is The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn in which a boy runs away from home along with a runaway slave.

Print

Term	Definition

Édouard Manet	The Luncheon on the Grass (Le déjeuner sur l'herbe)

Alexandre-Gustave Eiffel	The Eiffel Tower

Aubrey Beardsley	The Peacock Skirt

Henry Ossawa Tanner	The Thankful Poor

Paul Cézanne	The Basket of Apples

Rosa Bonheur	The Horse Fair

Print

Idealism	Theory that reality is a mental construction or that the object of external perception consists of ideas.

Art Nouveau	Art movement of the late 19th century - early 20th century that favored sinuous lines, curves, and organic motifs, such as plants and flowers.

Utilitarianism	The ethical approach that emphasizes pragmatic ethical decisions for the greater good.

Urbanization	The movement of diverse populations into urban areas.

Nationalism	A variant of patriotism characterized by intense loyalty to a particular nation and its defining values and features.

Imperialism	The policy of extending the rule of an empire or nation over foreign countries, or of acquiring and holding colonies and dependencies.

Social Darwinism	The theory that individuals, groups, and communities are subject to the same principle of natural selection as plants and animals.

Symbolism	The use of a symbol, object, or image to represent something else (that is, a concept or idea).

Impressionism	Art movement of the late 19th century that emphasized simplified composition and the effect of light and color to capture a painter's visual impression.

Atonality	Describes music that is written in a way that avoids centering around a specific key.

Exoticism	An artistic trend that took place in Europe in the 19th century, which borrowed and glorified cultural aspects from non-Western civilizations.

Darwinism	The theory of evolution by natural selection developed by biologist Charles Darwin.

Materialism	Philosophical position that all processes, phenomena, and objects/beings can be explained as manifestations or results of matter.

Industrial Revolution	The 19th century transition in many countries from an agrarian economy to one dominated by machine manufacturing.

Motifs	In music, a brief but recognizable recurring fragment of a melody.

Scientific Materialism	The belief that physical reality, as seen through the natural sciences, is all that truly exists.

Colonialism	The political, economic, and cultural domination by one country over another country or region.

Natural Selection	The gradual process by which certain biological traits fade away or grow through the reproductive success or failure of the individuals that have that trait; a term coined by Charles Darwin to illustrate that certain traits are better suited for certain environments than others.

Industrialism	The emphasis on an industrialized economic system.

Post-Impressionism	Art movement of the late 19th century that while influenced by Impressionism emphasized a greater concern for expression, structure, form, and emotional response.

Utopian	Describes an ideal community or society; often used to describe a society that does not exist in reality.

• The Classical Period: balance, truth/reason, democracy/republic, polytheism, humanism

• The Middle Ages Period (not covered in this course): religion, deference to God, crusades, pacifism, humility, feudalism, chivalry

• The Renaissance Period: rebirth of classicism, humanism, rationalism, scientific expansion, university system, individualism, self-fashioning

• The Baroque Period (not covered in this course): counter-reformation, divine right, absolutism, commonwealth, unification of the arts, world as a stage

• The Neoclassical Period: skepticism, rationalism, empiricism, order, deism, classicism

• The Romantic Period: nationalism, exoticism, revolution, heroism, passion, individualism, nature

• The Realist Period: Darwinism, industrialization, individualism, age of doubt

Epic hero - Has abilities like no human 

Romantic hero - Has abilities but could arguably be human Modern day hero - person that lifts car off kid.

Central Concepts

- Humanism
  The study of the creative and intellectual contributions of all human cultures. This consideration and examination began in the early Renaissance with the study of Greek and Roman civilizations, which were extolled as the pinnacle of human achievement.
- Myths
  are traditional stories of a people or culture that serve to explain some natural phenomenon, the origin of humanity, or customs or religious rites. Humans can pass on their visions, values, and memories from generation to generation through myths.

Beauty: Those qualities that give pleasure to the senses. They might be found (for example) in nature, a human face, a musical composition, a painting, or a poem. Aesthetic pleasure is that which beauty inspires in humans.

Aesthetic experience is an experience of beauty that inspires a feeling of pleasure, which is its own justification. We value the experience, whether in nature or the arts, intrinsically—independently of other things. The stimulus for aesthetic experience may be visual (a full moon, a painting, a dance movement, a person's face) or auditory (a song, the wind whistling through the trees) or literary (a written narrative or verse).

Archetypes are age-old models by which we comprehend human experience. These original models—for example, "the hero" or "descent into the underworld" or "scapegoat"—are transmitted from generation to generation through mythology and become part of our subconscious.