---
title: Managing Cloud Security
description: C838
published: true
date: 2022-05-24T21:52:28.053Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-05-23T19:29:49.966Z
---

# Managing Cloud Security C838

## **Instructor Guidelines:**

-   ***It highly recommended that you Do Not Schedule your first attempt until all of the material is covered.***
-   Watch the Mike Chapple CCSP series videos on LinkedIn Learning first.  The link to the videos is below:
    -   [https://www.linkedin.com/learning/ccsp-cert-prep-1-cloud-concepts-architecture-and-design/cloud-concepts-2?u=2045532](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/ccsp-cert-prep-1-cloud-concepts-architecture-and-design/cloud-concepts-2?u=2045532)
-   Go to the WGU course materials online.  There are 7 sections containing 14 lessons.
-   Go to Section 6, Ch. 12 and read the entire PDF “*_Security Guidance: For Critical Areas of Focus In Cloud Computing_*”.  It is attached to this email for your convenience.
-   Read through the remaining sections and lessons within the course.
-   Review the C838 Laws, Regs, Orgs, Study Guide V0 attached to this email.
-   Take the preassessment and then go back and review the areas in which you may need additional study time.
-   Take the objective assessment.

***Additional materials:***

Sybex questions: Complete all of Sybex Practice tests with a score of at least 90%.  To do them online, go to the resource: [https://lrps.wgu.edu/provision/148701708](https://lrps.wgu.edu/provision/148701708).    Go to page Xxvi and follow the sign-up procedures to receive a pin. 

 ***Note that throughout these notes some items will appear “****Highlighted****” these items are referenced in the course materials and should be considered testable.*** 

## Intel

*The exam covers the following areas (terminology below is based off of the Mike Chapple videos):*

*Cloud computing roles*

*Cloud computing drivers*

*Virtualization*

*Storage*

*Cloud deployment models*

*Cloud service categories*

*Cloud security standards (ISO, NIST, PCI DSS, HIPAA, SCA, GDRP, GLBA, SOX)*

*Cloud data lifecycle*

*Data obfuscation (tokenization, masking)*

*Data Loss Prevention*

*Information rights management*

*Intellectual property*

*Cloud data centers (site and facility design, environmental controls, physical security controls, physical access controls)*

*Business continuity and disaster recovery*

*Secure software development lifecycle*

*Application security vulnerabilities*

*Risk management*

*REST and SOAP*

*Physical and logical security*

*Lines of communication*

*Network security*

*Security baselines and standards*

*Monitoring*

*Threat assessment*

*Incident management*

*Supply chain risk*

*Cloud privacy and compliance*

*\-------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------*

*1\. Its not hard just a lot of memorization.*

*2\. Know the different types of Clouds and what they are best used for (Public, Private, Hybrid, Community) I had about 20-30 questions on these.*

*3\. Know the different Services and what they are used for and what security you are responsible for vs what the CSP is responsible for*

	-   *IAAS - Infrastructure as a Service - Cloud Provider provides the hardware and you provide everything else.* 
	-   *PAAS - Platform as a Service - Cloud Provider provides the hardware and OS and you build your applications*
	-   *SAAS - Software as a Service - Cloud provider provides everything. All you do is login and use the app.*

*4\. Know what each of these refer to SOX, GLBA, HIPPA, GDPR* 

*5\. There are a lot of questions on the cloud data life cycle*

*6\. There are a lot of questions on the cloud data security life cycle.*

*7\. Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery*

*8\. There were some questions about Cross site scripting, man in the middle and other basic security but it didnt go to deep. only a couple of questions.*

*9\. Know the ISO standards.*

*It was heavy on points 2, 3, and 4. If you take the pre assessment and do really well you should be ok for the exam.*

*I also used this for flashcards*

[*https://quizlet.com/373930631/ccsp-certified-cloud-security-professional-all-domains-ccsp-full-ccsp-review-assessment-managing-cloud-security-managing-cloud-security-preassessment-c838-flash-cards/*](https://quizlet.com/373930631/ccsp-certified-cloud-security-professional-all-domains-ccsp-full-ccsp-review-assessment-managing-cloud-security-managing-cloud-security-preassessment-c838-flash-cards/)

*\-------------------- ------------------------- --------------------------*

*1.) Know your laws. This includes American and International Law but most of the focus was on American Law. Especially focus on knowing HIPPA, GLBA, SOX, GDPR, and SCA.*
	\- You do need to know governance by ISO/IEC number, NIST and law names
	\- Know how GDPR interacts with the rest of the world (2-3 questions) 

*2.) Know your standards. This includes ISO/IEC as well as NIST standards. Most questions I got had to do with ISO/IEC but there were 1-2 on NIST standards. You don't have to know the standards in great depth, but you should know what each standard encompasses (ISO 31000 relates to risk management for instance).*

*3.) Be very familiar with SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS. Understand these different service models very well. You should know the differences between the models, which model is best to use for a specific use case, as well as the different responsibilities within each model.*

*4.) Understand SDLC and the Cloud Data Lifecycle. These two topics alone are around 8-12 questions.*

*5.) Understand REST and SOAP and their differences.*

*Take the practice tests and pay attention to the lessons you are weak on. If you get a question wrong, there is a link that will take you directly to the lesson and page where you can find the answer. Paying attention to lessons that kept popping up for me in the incorrect questions really helped me target my studying.*  

*The test is very long at 125 questions but you get plenty of time to get through it at 4 hours. It only took me about an hour to get through it all but take your time and pace yourself through the questions. The different domains you are tested on are pretty evenly weighted, so a good overall knowledge base of the material is going to help you best with this one.*  

\--------------------- --------------------- -------------------------------

\- Lots of questions on cloud types (IaaS, DaaS, PaaS, Saas, Public, Private, Hybrid, Community) including who is responsible for each portion (patching OS, physical security, data security)

\- 3-5 questions on data life cycle (what sections occur almost simultaneously, know the order of the steps)

\- A couple of questions tripped me up on how the cloud interacts with on premises data centers (what type of cloud should they use for cloud bursting, DR)



\--------------------------- ----------------------------- -------------------------------

-   The UCeritfy material provided wasn't as beneficial as I initially thought going through the course.  I think the majority of the material provided seems more beneficial for students that would attempt the actual certification exam.
-   The videos provided through UCertify that cover the 6 Domains of CCSP provided some valuable information regarding the specific Information Technology standards that would possibly appear on the Objective Assessment.
-   In Lesson 12 of the UCertify material there is a link provided to a PDF titled "Security Guidance: For Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing"; this document practically covers every topic discussed from Lessons 1-11 and was easier to understand and follow
-   The structure of the Pre-Assessment helped me in preparation for the actual Objective Assessment
-   Be aware that the way the questions are worded in the Objective Assessment may be very cryptic in what the question is asking for; I did have to read roughly 40+ questions two or three times to figure out what the question wanted answered

\-------------------- ---------------------------- -----------------------------
## **Notes**

## Cloud Computing Concepts and Architectures
The key techniques to create a cloud are abstraction and orchestration. We abstract the resources from the underlying physical infrastructure to create our pools, and use orchestration (and automation) to coordinate carving out and delivering a set of resources from the pools to the consumers.
The Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) uses the NIST model for cloud computing as its standard for defining cloud computing. The CSA also endorses the ISO/IEC model which is more in-depth, and additionally serves as a reference model.
•	Resource pooling is the most fundamental characteristic, as discussed above. The provider abstracts resources and collects them into a pool, portions of which can be allocated to different consumers (typically based on policies).
•	Broad network access means that all resources are available over a network, without any need for direct physical access; the network is not necessarily part of the service.
•	Rapid elasticity allows consumers to expand or contract the resources they use from the pool (provisioning and deprovisioning), often completely automatically
•	Measured service meters what is provided, to ensure that consumers only use what they are allotted, and, if necessary, to charge them for it.
“SPI” tiers is a term to reference the three service models SaaS, PaaS and IaaS.
All this is facilitated using Application Programming Interfaces. APIs are typically the underlying communications method for components within a cloud, some of which (or an entirely different set) are exposed to the cloud user to manage their resources and configurations. Most cloud APIs these days use REST (Representational State Transfer), which runs over the HTTP protocol, making it extremely well suited for Internet services.
In most cases, those APIs are both remotely accessible and wrapped into a web-based user interface. This combination is the cloud management plane, since consumers use it to manage and configure the cloud resources, such as launching virtual machines.
IaaS consists of a facility, hardware, an abstraction layer, an orchestration (core connectivity and delivery) layer to tie together the abstracted resources, and APIs to remotely manage the resources and deliver them to consumers.
A customer asks for an instance (virtual server) of a particular size and the cloud controller determines which server has the capacity and allocates an instance of the requested size.
PaaS adds an additional layer of integration with application development frameworks, middleware capabilities, and functions such as databases, messaging, and queuing. These services allow developers to build applications on the platform with programming languages and tools that are supported by the stack.  In PaaS the cloud user only sees the platform, not the underlying infrastructure.

At a high level, both cloud and traditional computing adhere to a logical model:
•	Infrastructure: The core components of a computing system: compute, network, and storage. The foundation that everything else is built on. The moving parts. 
•	Metastructure: The protocols and mechanisms that provide the interface between the infrastructure layer and the other layers. The glue that ties the technologies and enables management and configuration. 
•	Infostructure: The data and information. Content in a database, file storage, etc. 
•	Applistructure: The applications deployed in the cloud and the underlying application services used to build them. For example, Platform as a Service features like message queues, artificial intelligence analysis, or notification services.
The key difference between cloud and traditional computing is the metastructure. Cloud metastructure includes the management plane components, which are network-enabled and remotely accessible. Another key difference is that, in cloud, you tend to double up on each layer.
Shared responsibility model - a responsibility matrix that depends on the particular cloud provider and feature/product, the service model, and the deployment model
The Consensus Assessments Initiative Questionnaire (CAIQ). A standard template for cloud providers to document their security and compliance controls.
The Cloud Controls Matrix (CCM), which lists cloud security controls and maps them to multiple security and compliance standards. The CCM can also be used to document security responsibilities.
High-level process for managing cloud security:
	•	Identify necessary security and compliance requirements, and any existing controls.
	•	Select your cloud provider, service, and deployment models.
	•	Define the architecture.
	•	Assess the security controls.
	•	Identify control gaps.
	•	Design and implement controls to fill the gaps.
	•	Manage changes over time.

## Governance and Enterprise Risk Management
Contracts: The primary tool of governance is the contract between a cloud provider and a cloud customer (this is true for public and private cloud). The contract is your only guarantee of any level of service or commitment—assuming there is no breach of contract, which tosses everything into a legal scenario
Supplier (cloud provider) Assessments: These assessments are performed by the potential cloud customer using available information and allowed processes/techniques.

Compliance reporting: Compliance reporting includes all the documentation on a provider’s internal (i.e. self) and external compliance assessments. They are the reports from audits of controls, which an organization can perform themselves, a customer can perform on a provider (although this usually isn’t an option in cloud), or have performed by a trusted third party.
The Cloud Security Alliance STAR Registry is an assurance program and documentation registry for cloud provider assessments based on the CSA Cloud Controls Matrix and Consensus Assessments Initiative Questionnaire.
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) is the overall management of risk for an organization. As with governance, the contract defines the roles and responsibilities for risk management between a cloud provider and a cloud customer.
Risk tolerance is the amount of risk that the leadership and stakeholders of an organization are willing to accept.
In the majority of cases, SaaS presents the most critical example of the need for a negotiated contract.
The likelihood of a fully negotiated contract is likely lower here than with either of the other service models. That’s because the core driver for most PaaS is to deliver a single capability with very high efficiency

## Legal Issues, Contracts and Electronic Discovery:
In Australia, two key laws provide protection to consumers of cloud services: the Privacy Act of 1988 (Privacy Act) and the Australian Consumer Law (ACL). The ACL protects consumers from false or misleading contracts and poor conduct from providers, such as failed breach notifications.
China’s Cyber Security Law imposes a series of security obligations to operators of critical information infrastructure, including internal organization, training, data backup; emergency response requirements, security inspections and annual assessments of cyber security risks; and reporting to relevant authorities. In addition, the law includes a data localization provision, which requires that personal information and other important data be stored within the territories of the People’s Republic of China
In Japan, the Act on the Protection of Personal Information (APPI) requires the private sector to protect personal information and data securely. Beginning in September 2017, amendments to the APPI law will limit the ability to transfer personal data to third parties, with prior consent of the data subject generally being required to transfer data to a third party.
The Russian data protection laws contain significant restrictions on data processing. Since September 2015, companies are required to store personal data of Russian citizens within Russia.


The European Union (EU) adopted the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in 2016, which is binding on all EU member states, as well as members of the European Economic Area (EEA).  The GDPR applies to the processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or processor in the EU/EEA, regardless of whether the processing takes place in the EU/EEA or not.  The processing of personal data is allowed only if (a) the data subject has freely given specific, informed and unambiguous indication of his/her consent to the processing of his/her personal data, or (b) the processing is authorized by a statutory provision.
When data or operations are transferred to a cloud, the responsibility for protecting and securing the data typically remains with the collector or custodian of that data, even if in some circumstances this responsibility may be shared with others. Even when it relies on a third party to host or process its data, the custodian of the data remains liable for any loss, damage, or misuse of the data. It is therefore prudent, and may be required by law or regulation, that the data custodian and the cloud provider enter into a formal written agreement that clearly defines the roles, the expectations of the parties, and the allocation of the many responsibilities that are attached to the data at stake.
Before entering into any contract, a critical part of due diligence must be to request and review all relevant aspects of the operations of the other party.  In most cases, the cloud customer will want to evaluate at least the applicable service level, end-user and legal agreements; privacy policies; security disclosures; and proof of compliance with applicable legal requirements.
In a cloud environment, a client may not be able to apply or use e-discovery tools that it uses in its own environment. Moreover, a client may not have the ability or administrative rights to search or access all the data hosted in the cloud.
In addition to data preservation obligations resulting from U.S. laws regarding e-discovery, companies need to be aware that data retention laws require covered entities to retain data for a certain period of time.
Scope of Preservation: A requesting party is entitled only to data hosted in the cloud that contains, or is reasonably calculated to lead to, relevant, probative information for the legal issue at hand. The party is not entitled to all the data in the cloud or in the application.
Access and Bandwidth: In most cases, a client’s access to its data in the cloud will be determined by its SLA.  In a related issue, a client’s right of access may provide them access to a full range of data, but not provide them the degree of functionality that would best assist them in a given situation.
Should a cloud service provider receive, from a third party, a request to provide information; this may be in the form of a subpoena, a warrant, or a court order in which access to the client data is demanded. The client may want to have the ability to fight the request for access in order to protect the confidentiality of their data. To this end, the cloud service agreement should require the cloud service provider to notify the customer that a subpoena was received and give the company time to fight the request for access.

## Compliance and Audit Management:
GRC, for governance, risk, and compliance. Although very closely related with audits — which are a key mechanism to support, assure, and demonstrate compliance — there is more to compliance than audits.
Best practices/frameworks like CSA CCM
If an IaaS provider is PCI DSS-certified, the customer can build their own PCI-compliant service on that platform and the provider’s infrastructure and operations should be outside the customer’s assessment scope.
An attestation is a legal statement from a third party, which can be used as their statement of audit findings. Attestations are a key tool when evaluating and working with cloud providers since the cloud customer does not always get to perform their own assessments.
Depending on the audit standard, actual results may only be releasable under a nondisclosure agreement (NDA), which means customers will need to enter into a basic legal agreement before gaining access to attestations for risk assessments or other evaluative purposes. This is often due to legal or contractual requirements with the audit firm, not due to any attempts and obfuscation by the cloud provider.
Artifacts are the logs, documentation, and other materials needed for audits and compliance; they are the evidence to support compliance activities.

## Information Governance:
Custodianship refers to who is managing the data. If a customer gives you their personal information and you don’t have the rights to own it, you are merely the custodian. That means you can only use it in approved ways. If you use a public cloud provider, they, likewise, become the custodian of the data.
Data/information governance means ensuring that the use of data and information complies with organizational policies, standards, and strategy.
Privacy is a sum of regulatory requirements, contractual obligations, and commitments to customers.
Information Management Policies. These tie to classification and the cloud needs to be added if you have them. They should also cover the different SPI tiers, since sending data to a SaaS vendor versus building your own IaaS app is very different. You need to determine what is allowed to go where in the cloud? Which products and services? With what security requirements?



Functions that can be performed with the data, by a given actor:
•	Read. View/read the data, including creating, copying, file transfers, dissemination, and other exchanges of information. 
•	Process. Perform a transaction on the data; update it; use it in a business processing transaction, etc. 
•	Store. Hold the data
An actor (person, application, or system/process, as opposed to the access device) performs each function in a location.
Controls: A control restricts a list of possible actions down to allowed actions.

## Management Plane and Business Continuity:
The three main aspects of BC/DR in the cloud are:
•	Ensuring continuity and recovery within a given cloud provider
•	Preparing for and managing cloud provider outages.
•	Considering options for portability, in case you need to migrate providers or platforms.
Your application can be balanced across zones so that if an entire zone goes down your application still stays up.
The management plane refers to the interfaces for managing your assets in the cloud. If you deploy virtual machines on a virtual network the management plane is how you launch those machines and configure that network.
The management plane controls and configures the metastructure (defined in Domain 1), and is also part of the metastructure itself.  As a reminder, cloud computing is the act of taking physical assets (like networks and processors) and using them to build resource pools. Metastructure is the glue and guts to create, provision, and deprovision the pools. The management plane includes the interfaces for building and managing the cloud itself, but also the interfaces for cloud users to manage their own allocated resources of the cloud.
APIs and web consoles are the way the management plane is delivered. Application Programming Interfaces allow for programmatic management of the cloud. They are the glue that holds the cloud’s components together and enables their orchestration.
Cloud providers and platforms will also often offer Software Development Kits (SDKs) and Command Line Interfaces (CLIs) to make integrating with their APIs easier.
APIs are typically REST for cloud services, since REST is easy to implement across the Internet. REST APIs have become the standard for web-based services since they run over HTTP/S and thus work well across diverse environments
These can use a variety of authentication mechanisms, as there is no single standard for authentication in REST. HTTP request signing and OAuth are the most common.
All privileged user accounts should use multi-factor authentication (MFA). If possible, all cloud accounts (even individual user accounts) should use MFA.
Perimeter security: Protecting from attacks against the management plane’s components itself, such as the web and API servers. It includes both lower-level network defenses as well as higher-level defenses against application attacks
BC/DR must take a risk-based approach.
Software-Defined Infrastructure allows you to create an infrastructure template to configure all or some aspects of a cloud deployment. These templates are then translated natively by the cloud platform or into API calls that orchestrate the configuration.
Infostructure: Data synchronization is often one of the more difficult issues to manage across locations, even if the actual storage costs are manageable. T
Applistructure: The application assets like code, message queues, etc. When a cloud user builds their own cloud applications they’re usually built on top of IaaS and/or PaaS, so resiliency and recovery are inherently tied to those layers. But Applistructure includes the full range of everything in an application.
SaaS may often be the biggest provider outage concern, due to total reliance on the provider.

## Infrastructure Security:
In cloud computing there are two macro layers to infrastructure:
•	The fundamental resources pooled together to create a cloud.
•	The virtual/abstracted infrastructure managed by a cloud user.
We most commonly see at least three different networks which are isolated onto dedicated hardware since there is no functional or traffic overlap:
•	The service network for communications between virtual machines and the Internet.
•	The storage network to connect virtual storage to virtual machines.
•	A management network for management and API traffic.
Microsegmentation (also sometimes referred to as hypersegregation) leverages virtual network topologies to run more, smaller, and more isolated networks without incurring additional hardware costs that historically make such models prohibitive.
One emerging architecture for hybrid cloud connectivity is “bastion” or “transit” virtual networks:
•	The cloud user builds a dedicated virtual network for the hybrid connection and then peers any other networks through the designated bastion network.
•	Second-level networks connect to the data center through the bastion network, but since they aren’t peered to each other they can’t talk to each other and are effectively segregated.
Containers: Containers are code execution environments that run within an operating system (for now), sharing and leveraging resources of that operating system. While a VM is a full abstraction of an operating system, a container is a constrained place to run segregated processes while still utilizing the kernel and other capabilities of the base OS.
Platform-based workloads: This is a more complex category that covers workloads running on a shared platform that aren’t virtual machines or containers, such as logic/procedures running on a shared database platform.
Serverless computing: Serverless is a broad category that refers to any situation where the cloud user doesn’t manage any of the underlying hardware or virtual machines, and just accesses exposed functions.
Auto-scaling and containers, by nature, work best when you run instances launched dynamically based on an image; those instances can be shut down when no longer needed for capacity without breaking an application stack. This is core to the elasticity of compute in the cloud.  We call these virtual machines immutable.

## Virtualization and Containers:
Virtualization adds two new layers for security controls:
•	Security of the virtualization technology itself, e.g., securing a hypervisor.
•	Security controls for the virtual assets.
The primary security responsibilities of the cloud provider in compute virtualization are to:
•	Isolation ensures that compute processes or memory in one virtual machine/container should not be visible to another.
•	Securing the underlying infrastructure and the virtualization technology from external attack or internal misuse. This means using patched and up-to-date hypervisors that are properly configured and supported with processes to keep them up to date and secure over time.
The provider should disable packet sniffing or other metadata “leaks” that could expose data or configurations between tenants.
Tagging or other SDN-level metadata should also not be exposed outside the management plane or a compromised host could be used to span into the SDN itself
Cloud overlay networks are a special kind of WAN virtualization technology for created networks that span multiple “base” networks. For example, an overlay network could span physical and cloud locations or multiple cloud networks, perhaps even on different providers.



## Incident Response:
The Incident Response Lifecycle is defined in the NIST 800-61rev2 document. It includes the following phases and major activities:
•	Preparation: “Establishing an incident response capability so that the organization is ready to respond to incidents.”
•	Detection and Analysis
•	Containment, Eradication, Recovery: Taking systems offline. Considerations for data loss versus service availability.  Clean up compromised devices and restore systems to normal operation.
•	Post-Mortem: What could have been done better?
When preparing for cloud incident response, here are some major considerations:
•	SLAs and Governance
•	IaaS/PaaS vs. SaaS
•	“Cloud jump kit:” These are the tools needed to investigate in a remote location
•	Architect the cloud environment for faster detection, investigation, and response
Cloud-based applications should leverage automation and orchestration to streamline and accelerate the response, including containment and recovery.
The SLA with each cloud service provider must guarantee support for the incident handling required for the effective execution of the enterprise incident response plan.

## Application Security:
An effective application security program domain is broken into the following major areas:
•	The Secure Software Development Lifecycle (SSDLC): How cloud computing affects application security, from design to deployment.
•	Design and Architecture: Trends in designing applications for cloud computing that affect and can even improve security
•	DevOps and Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD):  Brings new security considerations, and again, opportunities to improve security over more manual development and deployment patterns like waterfall.
The Secure Software Development Lifecycle (SSDLC):
•	Secure Design and Development
•	Secure Deployment
•	Secure Operations

There are five main phases in secure application design and development:
•	Training
•	Define
•	Design
•	Develop
•	Test
There are multiple kinds of application security tests that could be potentially integrated into development and deployment:
Code Review: Any application communication with the management plane (e.g., API calls to the cloud service, some of which can alter the infrastructure) should be scrutinized, especially early in the project. Aside from looking at the code itself, the security team can focus on ensuring that only the least privilege entitlements are enabled for that part of the application and then validate them with the management plane configuration.
Unit testing, regression testing, and functional tests: These are the standard tests used by developers in their normal processes.
Static Application Security Testing (SAST): On top of the normal range of tests, these should ideally incorporate checks on API calls to the cloud service.
Dynamic Application Security Testing (DAST): DAST tests running applications and includes tests such as web vulnerability testing and fuzzing
Vulnerability assessment can be integrated into CI/CD pipelines and implemented in cloud fairly easily.  The first is running full assessments against images or containers as part of the pipeline in a special testing area of the cloud.  The image is only approved for production deployments if it passes this test. We see a similar pattern used to test entire infrastructures by building a test environment using infrastructure as code.  In both cases production is tested less, or not at all, since it should be immutable and exactly resemble the test environment.
On some cloud platforms it may be possible to use built-in assessment and configuration management features. It may also be possible to automatically remediate unapproved changes, depending on the platform and the nature of the change.
The following trends offer opportunities to reduce common security issues:
Segregation by default: Applications can easily be run in their own isolated cloud environments.
Immutable infrastructure:
Increased use of micro-services: In cloud computing, it is easier to segregate out different services onto different servers (or containers)
PaaS and “serverless” architectures: With PaaS and “serverless” setups there is great potential for dramatically reducing the attack surface.
Software-defined security: Security teams can leverage all the same tools and technologies to automate many security operations, even integrating them with the application stack.
Event driven security: Certain cloud providers support event-driven code execution. In these cases, the management plane detects various activities which can in turn trigger code execution through a notification message, or via serverless hosted code. Security can define events for security actions and use the event-driven capabilities to trigger automated notification, assessment, remediation, or other security processes.

## Data Security and Encryption:
Data security controls tend to fall into three buckets:
•	Controlling what data goes into the cloud (and where).
•	Protecting and managing the data in the cloud.
•	Enforcing information lifecycle management security
Database: Cloud platforms and providers may support a variety of different kinds of databases, including existing commercial and open source options, as well as their own proprietary systems. Proprietary databases typically use their own APIs. Commercial or open source databases are hosted by the provider and typically use existing standards for connections. These can be relational or non-relational—the latter includes NoSQL and other key/value storage systems, or file system-based databases (e.g. HDFS).
CASB: Cloud Access and Security Brokers (also known as Cloud Security Gateways) discover internal use of cloud services using various mechanisms such as network monitoring, integrating with an existing network gateway or monitoring tool, or even by monitoring DNS queries. After discovering which services your users are connecting to, most of these products then offer monitoring of activity on approved services through API connections (when available) or inline interception (man in the middle monitoring). Many support DLP and other security alerting and even offer controls to better manage use of sensitive data in cloud services.
URL filtering: While not as robust as CASB a URL filter/web gateway may help you understand which cloud services your users are using (or trying to use).
DLP: If you monitor web traffic (and look inside SSL connections) a Data Loss Prevention (DLP) tool may also help detect data migrations to cloud services.
Most cloud provider APIs use Transport Layer Security (TLS) by default

Access controls should be implemented with a minimum of three layers:
•	Management plane: These are your controls for managing access of users that directly access the cloud platform’s management plane.
•	Public and internal sharing controls: If data is shared externally to the public or partners that don’t have direct access to the cloud platform, there will be a second layer of controls for this access.
•	Application level controls: As you build your own applications on the cloud platform you will design and implement your own controls to manage access.
Format Preserving Encryption encrypts data with a key but also keeps the same structural format as tokenization.
There are three components of an encryption system: data, the encryption engine, and key management.
Volume storage encryption:
•	Instance-managed encryption: The encryption engine runs within the instance, and the key is stored in the volume but protected by a passphrase or keypair. 
•	Externally managed encryption: The encryption engine runs in the instance, but the keys are managed externally and
Object and file storage
•	Client-side encryption: When object storage is used as the back-end for an application (including mobile applications), encrypt the data using an encryption engine embedded in the application or client. 
•	Server-side encryption: Data is encrypted on the server (cloud) side after being transferred in. The cloud provider has access to the key and runs the encryption engine. 
•	Proxy encryption: In this model, you connect the volume to a special instance or appliance/ software, and then connect your instance to the encryption instance. The proxy handles all crypto operations and may keep keys either onboard or externally.
Database encryption: Data is encrypted in the database using encryption that’s built in and is supported by a database platform like Transparent Database Encryption (TDE) or at the field level.
Data Loss Prevention (DLP) is typically a way to monitor and protect data that your employees access via monitoring local systems, web, email, and other traffic. It is not typically used within data centers, and thus is more applicable to SaaS than PaaS or IaaS.
•	Test data generation: This is the creation of a database with non-sensitive test data based on a “real” database. It can use scrambling and other randomization techniques to create a data set that resembles the source in size and structure but lacks sensitive data. 
•	Dynamic masking: Dynamic masking rewrites data on the fly, typically using a proxy mechanism, to mask all or part of data delivered to a user. 

## Identity, Entitlement, and Access Management:
Identity and access management is always complicated. At the heart we are mapping some form of an entity (a person, system, piece of code, etc.) to a verifiable identity associated with various attributes (which can change based on current circumstances), and then making a decision on what they can or can’t do based on entitlements.
Identifier: the means by which an identity can be asserted. For digital identities this is often a cryptological token. In the real world it might be your passport.
Attributes: facets of an identity. Attributes can be relatively static (like an organizational unit) or highly dynamic (IP address, device being used, if the user authenticated with MFA, location, etc.).
Persona: the expression of an identity with attributes that indicates context. For example, a developer who logs into work and then connects to a cloud environment as a developer on a particular project. The identity is still the individual, and the persona is the individual in the context of that project.
Access control: restricting access to a resource. Access management is the process of managing access to the resources
Federated Identity Management: the process of asserting an identity across different systems or organizations. This is the key enabler of Single Sign On and also core to managing IAM.
Authoritative source: the “root” source of an identity, such as the directory server that manages employee identities.
Identity Provider: the source of the identity in federation.
Relying Party: the system that relies on an identity assertion from an identity provider.
Federation involves an identity provider making assertions to a relying party after building a trust relationship. At the heart are a series of cryptographic operations to build the trust relationship and exchange credentials. A practical example is a user logging in to their work network, which hosts a directory server for accounts. That user then opens a browser connection to a SaaS application. Instead of logging in, there are a series of behind-the-scenes operations, where the identity provider (the internal directory server) asserts the identity of the user, and that the user authenticated, as well as any attributes. The relying party trusts those assertions and logs the user in without the user entering any credentials. In fact, the relying party doesn’t even have a username or password for that user; it relies on the identity provider to assert successful authentication. To the user they simply go to the website for the SaaS application and are logged in, assuming they successfully authenticated with the internal directory.
Identity brokers handle federating between identity providers and relying parties.
Authentication is the responsibility of the identity provider.

## Security as a Service:
Security as a Service (SecaaS) providers offer security capabilities as a cloud service. This includes dedicated SecaaS providers, as well as packaged security features from general cloud-computing providers.
Security assessments are third-party or customer-driven audits of cloud services or assessments of on-premises systems via cloud-provided solutions.
There are three main categories of security assessments: 
•	Traditional security/vulnerability assessments of assets that are deployed in the cloud (e.g. virtual machines/instances for patches and vulnerabilities) or on-premises. 
•	Application security assessments, including SAST, DAST, and management of RASP. 
•	Cloud platform assessment tools that connect directly with the cloud service over API to assess not merely the assets deployed in the cloud, but the cloud configuration as well.
Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) systems aggregate (via push or pull mechanisms) log and event data from virtual and real networks, applications, and systems. This information is then correlated and analyzed to provide real-time reporting on and alerting of information or events that may require intervention or other types of responses.

## Related Technologies:
Big data is high volume, high velocity, and/or high variety information assets that require new forms of processing to enable enhanced decision making, insight discovery and process optimization.
There are three common components of big data: Distributed data collection, Distributed storage and Distributed processing.
The Internet of Things is a blanket term for non-traditional computing devices used in the physical world that utilize Internet connectivity.  Fitness trackers, connected lightbulbs, medical devices, and beyond.
Serverless computing is the extensive use of certain PaaS capabilities to such a degree that all or some of an application stack runs in a cloud provider’s environment without any customer-managed operating systems, or even containers.


## Terms and Definitions

**Access control**: restricting access to a resource. Access management is the process of managing access to the resources

**Apache Cloud Stack**: An open source cloud computing and IaaS platform developed to help make creating, deploying, and managing cloud services easier by providing a complete "stack" of features and components for cloud environments.

**Attributes**: facets of an identity. Attributes can be relatively static (like an organizational unit) or highly dynamic (IP address, device being used, if the user authenticated with MFA, location, etc.).

**Authoritative source:** the “root” source of an identity, such as the directory server that manages employee identities.

**Avoidance:**  Eliminating the risk that is simply too high and cannot be compensated for with adequate control mechanism.

**Broad network access** means that all resources are available over a network, without any need for direct physical access; the network is not necessarily part of the service.

**Business Requirement**: An operational driver for decision making and input for risk management.

**CASB**: Cloud Access and Security Brokers (also known as Cloud Security Gateways) discover internal use of cloud services using various mechanisms such as network monitoring, integrating with an existing network gateway or monitoring tool, or even by monitoring DNS queries. After discovering which services your users are connecting to, most of these products then offer monitoring of activity on approved services through API connections (when available) or inline interception (man in the middle monitoring). Many support DLP and other security alerting and even offer controls to better manage use of sensitive data in cloud services.

**Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB)**:  A third-party entity offering independent identity and access management (IAM) services to CSPs and cloud customers, often as an intermediary.

**Cloud App (Cloud Application)**: The phrase used to describe a software application accessed via the Internet; may include an agent or applet installed locally on the user's device.

**Cloud Architect**: Subject matter expert for cloud computing infrastructure and deployment.

**Cloud Backup**: Backing up data to a remote, cloud-based server. As a form of cloud storage, cloud backup data is stored in an accessible form from multiple distributed resources that comprise a cloud.

**Cloud Computing (NIST Definition)**: A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction"

**Cloud Computing Reseller**: A company that purchases hosting services from a cloud server hosting or computing provider and then resells them to its own customers.

**Cloud Computing**: A type of computing, compared to grid computing, that relies on ensuring computing resources rather than having local server or personal devices to handle applications. The goal of cloud computing is to apply traditional supercomputing or high-performance computing power, normally used by military and research facilities, to perform tens of trillions of computations per second and consumer-oriented applications such as financial portfolios, or even to deliver personalized information or power immersive computer games.

**Cloud Migration**: The process of transitioning all or part of a company's data, applications, and services from onsite premises to the cloud, where the information can be provided over the Internet on an on-demand basis.

**Cloud OS**: A phrase frequently used in place of PaaS to denote an association to cloud computing.

**Cloud Portability**: The ability to move applications and associated data between one cloud provider and another, or between legacy and cloud environments.

**Cloud Provider**: A service provider that offers customer storage or software solutions available via a public network, usually the Internet. The cloud provider dictates both the technology and operational procedures involved.

**Cloud Service Provider (CSP)**:  Provides administrative assistance for the customer and the customer's data and processing needs. Examples include Amazon Web Services, Rackspace, and Microsoft's Azure.

**Cloud Services Broker (CSB)**: Typically a third-party entity or company that looks to extend or enhance value to multiple customers of cloud-based services through relationships with multiple cloud service providers. It acts as a liaison between cloud services customers and cloud service providers, selecting the best provider for each customer and monitoring the services.

**Cloud Storage**: The storage of data online in the cloud, wherein a company's data is stored in an accessible form from multiple distributed and connected resources that comprise a cloud.
	- **Block Storage**: Allocates a large chunk of storage for access as a disk volume managed by the operating system.
	- **Object Storage**: Stores files as individual objects manageds by the cloud service provider

**Cloud Testing**: Load and performance testing conducted on the applications and services provided by a cloud provider, particularly the capability to access the services, in order to ensure optimal performance and scalability under a wide variety of conditions.

**Cloud overlay** networks are a special kind of WAN virtualization technology for created networks that span multiple “base” networks. For example, an overlay network could span physical and cloud locations or multiple cloud networks, perhaps even on different providers.

**Cloud portability**: The ability to move applications and associated data between one cloud provider and another, or between legacy and cloud environments.

**Cloud provider**: A service provider that offers customer storage or software solutions available via a public network, usually the Internet. 

**Code Review:** Any application communication with the management plane (e.g., API calls to the cloud service, some of which can alter the infrastructure) should be scrutinized, especially early in the project. Aside from looking at the code itself, the security team can focus on ensuring that only the least privilege entitlements are enabled for that part of the application and then validate them with the management plane configuration.

**Community Cloud**: A model where the cloud infrastructure is designed for use by a specific community. Generally, this is a community of users or consumers with shared concerns, missions, and/or security requirements.

**Compliance reporting:** Compliance reporting includes all the documentation on a provider’s internal (i.e. self) and external compliance assessments. They are the reports from audits of controls, which an organization can perform themselves, a customer can perform on a provider (although this usually isn’t an option in cloud), or have performed by a trusted third party.

**Containers:** Containers are code execution environments that run within an operating system (for now), sharing and leveraging resources of that operating system. While a VM is a full abstraction of an operating system, a container is a constrained place to run segregated processes while still utilizing the kernel and other capabilities of the base OS.

**Contracts**: The primary tool of governance is the contract between a cloud provider and a cloud customer (this is true for public and private cloud). The contract is your only guarantee of any level of service or commitment—assuming there is no breach of contract, which tosses everything into a legal scenario

**Controls**: A control restricts a list of possible actions down to allowed actions.

**Data Loss Prevention (DLP)** is typically a way to monitor and protect data that your employees access via monitoring local systems, web, email, and other traffic. It is not typically used within data centers, and thus is more applicable to SaaS than PaaS or IaaS.

**Data Loss Prevention (DLP)**: If you monitor web traffic (and look inside SSL connections) a DLP tool may also help detect data migrations to cloud services.

**Data custodians:** do not necessarily all have direct relationships with data owners; custodians can be third parties, or even further removed down the supply chain.

**Data owners:** remain legally responsible for all data they own. This is true even if data is compromised by a data custodian several times removed from the data owner.

**Database**: Cloud platforms and providers may support a variety of different kinds of databases, including existing commercial and open source options, as well as their own proprietary systems. Proprietary databases typically use their own APIs. Commercial or open source databases are hosted by the provider and typically use existing standards for connections. These can be relational or non-relational—the latter includes NoSQL and other key/value storage systems, or file system-based databases (e.g. HDFS).

**Dynamic Application Security Testing (DAST):** DAST tests running applications and includes tests such as web vulnerability testing and fuzzing

**Dynamic masking**: Dynamic masking rewrites data on the fly, typically using a proxy mechanism, to mask all or part of data delivered to a user.

**Elasticity**: This is the flexibility of allocating resources as needed for immediate usage, instead of purchasing resources according to other variables. For instance, a traditional organization might purchase one desktop for every employee. In that model, the organization would be paying for the entire capacity of the desktop computer—its processing power, its storage capacity, etc.—even though individual users would probably not be using the full capacity of each device at all times.  In the cloud environment, the organization is paying not for a device, but for the use of a service, when it is being used. The ability of the cloud vendor to offer this type of service (while remaining profitable) is based on the elasticity and the flexibility offered by recent enhancements in technology, including virtualization (we will discuss virtualization further in upcoming lessons). With virtualization, the cloud provider can allocate partial usage of each resource to every user and customer, when those users and customers require it, and nothing more, thereby avoiding wasted, underutilized resources and excess, nonproductive costs.   In a virtualized environment, users can also access their data from almost any device or platform, and almost any location. This allows portability, availability, and accessibility that exceed previous enterprise environments.

**Encryption:** Offers a degree of assurance that nobody without authorization will be able to access your data in a meaningful way.

**Enterprise Application**: The term used to describe applications or software that a business would use to assist the organization in solving enterprise problems.

**Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)** is the overall management of risk for an organization. As with governance, the contract defines the roles and responsibilities for risk management between a cloud provider and a cloud customer.

**Ephemeral**: Means tempary (Resources allocated for a short time)

**Eucalyptus**: An open source cloud computing and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) platform for enabling private clouds.

**Federated Identity Management**: the process of asserting an identity across different systems or organizations. This is the key enabler of Single Sign On and also core to managing IAM.

**Format Preserving Encryption** encrypts data with a key but also keeps the same structural format as tokenization.

**Hybrid Cloud**: A cloud solution that mixes elements of public, private, and community cloud models.

**IaaS boundaries:** The cloud provider creates and administers the hardware assets on which the customer’s programs and data will ride.

**Identifier**: the means by which an identity can be asserted. For digital identities this is often a cryptological token. In the real world it might be your passport.

**Identity Provider:** the source of the identity in federation.

**Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)**: Allows the customer to install all software, including operating systems (OSs) on hardware housed and connected by the cloud vendor.  One of three main categories of cloud computing services, alongside Software as a Service (SaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS). Offers only hardware and administration, leaving the customer responsible for the OS and other software.

**Layered defenses:** The practice of having multiple overlapping means of securing the environment with a variety of methods. 

**Managed Service Provider**: An IT service where the customer dictates both the technology and operational procedures, and an external party executes administration and operational support according to a contract.

**Measured service** meters what is provided, to ensure that consumers only use what they are allotted, and, if necessary, to charge them for it.

**Microsegmentation** (also sometimes referred to as **hypersegregation**) leverages virtual network topologies to run more, smaller, and more isolated networks without incurring additional hardware costs that historically make such models prohibitive.

**Mitigation:**  A process of taking steps to decrease the likelihood or the impact of the risk.

**Multi-Tenant**: Multiple customers using the same public cloud (and often the same hosts, in a virtualized cloud environment).

**PaaS boundaries:** The cloud provider is responsible for installing, maintaining, and administering the OS(s).

**Persona**: the expression of an identity with attributes that indicates context. For example, a developer who logs into work and then connects to a cloud environment as a developer on a particular project. The identity is still the individual, and the persona is the individual in the context of that project.

**Platform as a Service (PaaS)**  Contains everything included in IaaS, with the addition of OSs. This model is especially useful for software development operations (DevOps).  A way for customers to rent hardware, operating systems, storage, and network capacity over the Internet from a cloud service provider. PaaS is one of three main categories of cloud computing services, alongside Software as a Service (SaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).

**Platform-based workloads**: This is a more complex category that covers workloads running on a shared platform that aren’t virtual machines or containers, such as logic/procedures running on a shared database platform.

**Private Cloud**: The phrase used to describe a cloud computing platform that is implemented within the organization. A private cloud is designed to offer the same features and benefits of public cloud systems but removes a number of objections to the cloud computing model, including control over enterprise or customer data, worries about security, and issues connected to regulatory compliance or contractual agreements.

**Rapid elasticity** allows consumers to expand or contract the resources they use from the pool (provisioning and deprovisioning), often completely automatically

**Relying Party:** the system that relies on an identity assertion from an identity provider.

**Resource pooling** is the most fundamental characteristic, as discussed above. The provider 
abstracts resources and collects them into a pool, portions of which can be allocated to different consumers (typically based on policies).

**Risk appetite** : Refers to the level, amount, or type of risk that the organization finds acceptable. 

**Risk tolerance** is the amount of risk that the leadership and stakeholders of an organization are willing to accept.

**Scalability**: The organization's computing needs won't remain static: there will be new (and hopefully more) users, customers, and data as the organization continually matures. A cloud service can easily meet those needs, either temporarily or long-term, in a much more cost-efficient manner than a traditional environment, because new computing resources can be assigned and allocated without any significant additional capital investment on the part of the cloud provider, and at an incremental cost to the cloud customer.

**Scaling**: The process of expanding resorces to meet increased demand.
		- **Vertical Scaling** - Adding more resources ( for example, CPU, Memory) to existing servers to meet increased demand.
	    - **Horizontal Scaling** - Adding more servers to the pool to meet the increased demand.
    
**Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)** systems aggregate (via push or pull mechanisms) log and event data from virtual and real networks, applications, and systems. This information is then correlated and analyzed to provide real-time reporting on and alerting of information or events that may require intervention or other types of responses.

**Security as a Service (SecaaS)** providers offer security capabilities as a cloud service. This includes dedicated SecaaS providers, as well as packaged security features from general cloud-computing providers.

**Serverless computing:** Serverless is a broad category that refers to any situation where the cloud user doesn’t manage any of the underlying hardware or virtual machines, and just accesses exposed functions.

**Shared responsibility model** - a responsibility matrix that depends on the particular cloud provider and feature/product, the service model, and the deployment model

**Simplicity**: Usage and administration of cloud services ought to be transparent to cloud customers and users; from their perspective, a digital data service is paid for and can be used, with very little additional input other than what is necessary to perform their duties. Proper cloud implementations should not require constant or even frequent interaction between the cloud provider and cloud customer.

**Software as a Service (SaaS)**  Includes everything listed in the previous Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) models, with the addition of software programs. SaaS is a software delivery method that provides access to software and its functionality remotely as a web-based service. Software as a Service allows organizations to access business functionality at a cost typically less than paying for licensed application because SaaS pricing is based on a monthly fee. SaaS is one of three main categories of cloud computing services, alongside Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).

**Static Application Security Testing (SAST):** On top of the normal range of tests, these should ideally incorporate checks on API calls to the cloud service.

**Supplier (cloud provider) Assessments**: These assessments are performed by the potential cloud customer using available information and allowed processes/techniques.

**Test data generation:** This is the creation of a database with non-sensitive test data based on a “real” database. It can use scrambling and other randomization techniques to create a data set that resembles the source in size and structure but lacks sensitive data.

**The Data Life Cycle** create, store, use, share, archive, destroy

**The data custodian** is any organization or person who manipulates, stores, or moves the data on behalf of the data owner. Within the organization, a data custodian might be a database administrator. In the cloud context, the data custodian is usually the cloud provider. From an international perspective, the data custodian is also known as the data processor.

**The data owner** is the organization that has collected or created the data, in general terms. Within the organization, we often assign a specific data owner as being the individual with rights and responsibilities for that data; this is usually the department head or business unit manager for the office that has created or collected a certain dataset. From a cloud perspective, the cloud customer is usually the data owner. Many international treaties and frameworks refer to the data owner as the data controller.

**Transference**  A risk management strategy that involves the contractual shifting of a risk from one organization to another.

**Trusted Cloud Initiative (TCI)** Reference Model: The TCI reference model is a guide for cloud providers, allowing them to create a holistic architecture (including the physical facility of the datacenter, the logical layout of the network, and the processes necessary to utilize both) that cloud customers can purchase and use with comfort and confidence. For more information, visit Reference Architecture

**URL filtering**: While not as robust as CASB a URL filter/web gateway may help you understand which cloud services your users are using (or trying to use).

**Unit testing, regression testing, and functional tests:** These are the standard tests used by developers in their normal processes.

**Vendor Locking**: a method to "lock in" a customer to a specific term
	  - **Vendor Lock-in**: Vendor lock-in occurs in a situation where a customer may be unable to leave, migrate, or transfer to an alternate provider due to technical or nontechnical constraints.
	  - **Vendor Lock-out**: Vendor lock-out occurs when a customer is unable to recover or access their own data due to the cloud provider going into bankruptcy or otherwise leaving the market.

**Virtualization**: A process of creating a virtual version of something, including virtual computer hardware platforms, operating systems, storage devices, and computer network resources. Creating a virtual (a logical vs. a physical) version of something, including virtual computer hardware platforms, operating systems, storage devices, and computer network resources. Computer hardware virtualization is a way of improving overall efficiency. It involves CPUs that provide support for virtualization in hardware, and other hardware components that help improve the performance of a guest environment.: This is the flexibility of allocating resources as needed for immediate usage, instead of purchasing resources according to other variables. For instance, a traditional organization might purchase one desktop for every employee. In that model, the organization would be paying for the entire capacity of the desktop computer—its processing power, its storage capacity, etc.—even though individual users would probably not be using the full capacity of each device at all times.  In the cloud environment, the organization is paying not for a device, but for the use of a service, when it is being used. The ability of the cloud vendor to offer this type of service (while remaining profitable) is based on the elasticity and the flexibility offered by recent enhancements in technology, including virtualization (we will discuss virtualization further in upcoming lessons). With virtualization, the cloud provider can allocate partial usage of each resource to every user and customer, when those users and customers require it, and nothing more, thereby avoiding wasted, underutilized resources and excess, nonproductive costs.   In a virtualized environment, users can also access their data from almost any device or platform, and almost any location. This allows portability, availability, and accessibility that exceed previous enterprise environments.

An **actor** (person, application, or system/process, as opposed to the access device) performs each function in a location.

The **Cloud Controls Matrix (CCM),** which lists cloud security controls and maps them to multiple security and compliance standards. The CCM can also be used to document security responsibilities.

The **Cloud Security Alliance STAR Registry** is an assurance program and documentation registry for cloud provider assessments based on the CSA Cloud Controls Matrix and Consensus Assessments Initiative Questionnaire.

The **Consensus Assessments Initiative Questionnaire (CAIQ).** A standard template for cloud providers to document their security and compliance controls.

**“SPI” tiers** is a term to reference the three service models SaaS, PaaS and IaaS.

	  Software as a Service (SaaS)
	
	    -   Customer owns data and nothing else
	    -   On-Demand
	    -   Cheap
	    -   Vendor Managed
	    -   Google Ecosystem/Microsoft Office 365
	
	  Platform as a Service (PaaS)
	
	    -   Customer Owns data and applications, but not the operating system
	    -   Development Environment
	    -   Web Server/Database/Program Language Environment
	    -   Cost-effective rapid development/Easy deployment
	    -   Can be private/public
	    -   Amazon Beanstalk
	
	  Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
	
	    -   The customer owns everything--including network devices but is still reliant on the provider for power/availability/network connectivity
	    -   For SysAdmins
	    -   Amazon EC2

==**Hypervisors**:==

	-   Type 1: Runs on bare-metal, it is the baseline operating system
		-   KVM
		-   Hyper-V
		-   ESXi
	-   Type 2: Runs on the operating system, larger attack surface
		-   Workstation
		-   Oracle VM
		-   VMWare Fusion
		-   Parallels
		-   Sun VirtualBox

REST: Representational State Transfer

	-   Architectural Style
	-   Permits many formats: JSON, HTML, XML, plain text
	-   Supports SSL & HTTPS
	-   Fewer resources/bandwidth
	-   Can be Cached
	-   Needs no knowledge of the API
	-   Simplicity
	-   Optimized for web
	-   Built to access a URI

SOAP: Simple Object Access Protocol

	-   A Protocol
	-   ONLY XML
	-   Supports WS-Security and SSL
	-   Requires more resources/bandwidth than REST
	-   CANNOT be cached
	-   Strict communications contract with and requires knowledge of the API
	-   Higher security
	-   Has retry logic
	-   Built to perform a function
	-   Better for FINANCIAL transactions

NIST SDLC Model:

	-   Initiation
	-   Acquisition/Development
	-   Implementation/Assessment
	-   Operations/Maintenance
	-   Sunset(Disposal)

SDLC: Software development lifecycle stages

	-   Define
	-   AKA: Functional Specifications
	-   Business Reqs
	-   Tech Reqs
	-   Sec Analysis
	-   Role Definitions
	-   Documentation
	-   Regulations
	-   Design
	-   Software Structure
	-   Tool selection
	-   Team structure
	-   Code management
	-   Database Design
	-   Interface Design
	-   Module integration
	-   Prototyping
	-   Security profiling
	-   Role analysis
	-   Development
	-   Planning
	-   Programming
	-   Modeling
	-   Module Dev
	-   Database Dev
	-   Documentation
	-   Testing
	-   System build
	-   Installation build
	-   Fault fixes
	-   Repair and redesign
	-   Security Testing
	-   Authentication
	-   Role-based access (RBA)
	-   Regulatory testing documentation
	-   Deployment (Release)
	-   End-user education
	-   Deployment
	-   Documentation
	-   Application BC/DR (Business continuity/disaster recovery)
	-   Maintenance
	-   Change Request Management
	-   Continuous Monitoring
	-   Performance Monitoring
	-   Event Management
	-   Impact Analysis

Software Configuration Management:

	-   Build Management
	-   Configuration Management
	-   Configuration Control

Common Vulnerabilities:

	-   Injection
	-   Attack on an interpreter: APIs, SQL statements, LDAP queries
	-   Broken Authentication and Session Management
	-   The attacker steals creds/session id
	-   Cross-Site Scripting XSS
	-   Client-side abuse of a web-browser to run malicious scripts
	-   Direct object references
	-   Code should obscure these references
	-   Security Misconfiguration
	-   The attacker accesses default accounts, unused pages, unpatched flaws or unprotected files to gain access
	-   Buffer Overflows
	-   Attacker infused the input memory stack with a system compromising directive
	-   Sensitive Data Exposure
	-   Encryption key theft, man-in-the-middle attacks, theft of clear data assets at rest/transit
	-   Missing functional level access control
	-   Insider threat, misuse of privileges
	-   Cross-site request forgery (CSRF)
	-   Forged HTTP requests that trick a victim into submitting them via image tags/XSS or other techniques. If the user is authenticated the attack succeeds.

Cloud Data Life Cycle

	-   Create
	-   Store
	-   Use
	-   Share
	-   Archive
	-   Destroy

Data Security Terms:

	-   Tokenization
	-   Required for PCI DSS
	-   EX: Turning a credit card number into a random string of characters, a signature that represents the credit card number
	-   Obfuscation
	-   Taking source code and making it hard to read on purpose
	-   Using XOR ciphers
	-   Data Masking
	-   Additional security layer in protecting sensitive data
	-   Used in the dev ops process to make legitimate data into fictional data
	-   EX: Taking a database and changing the names of real people into cartoon characters
	-   Anonymization
	-   Removing PII values from data
	-   Randomization
	-   DLP: Data Loss Prevention
	-   Putting controls on data to restrict what a device or user can transmit or receive

Storage Architecture

	-   Distributed
	-   Object
	-   Single repository
	-   Unique Identifiers
	-   Contains meta-data that describes the actual content
	-   Block
	-   For a Storage Area Network
	-   Multi-platform/portability
	-   Unique Identifiers
	-   File System
	-   Everything goes in a folder
	-   Structured Database
	-   Clearly Defined and searchable
	-   More overhead
	-   Unstructured Database
	-   Data in its native format
	-   Less overhead

Application Security Testing:

	-   SAST: Static Application Security Testing
	-   Whitebox Testing
	-   Examination of source code/binary code
	-   Non-Running State
	-   SQL Injection, Buffer Overflows, Unhandled Errors, XSS, Backdoors
	-   DAST: Dynamic Application Security Testing
	-   Blackbox Testing
	-   Used to test WEB applications
	-   Tested in a RUNNING state
	-   Tests HTTP/HTML from the outside
	-   Mimics the agent of approach/the perspective of the attacker
	-   Probes the attack surface
	-   Deliberately supply malicious data/inputs to web pages
	-   ID’s SQL injection, XSS
	-   Discovers runtime issues such as:
	-   Authentication Issues
	-   Server misconfigurations
	-   Access Issues
	-   IAST: Interactive Application Security Testing
	-   Combination of SAST and DAST
	-   An automated testing mechanism similar to a debugger
	-   ID’s issues related to:
	-   Database queries
	-   File System Access
	-   Web Service Calls
	-   Invalid Validations
	-   Can be ACTIVE or PASSIVE:
	-   Active IAST: the app is deliberately attacked and monitored
	-   Passive IAST: the application is monitored
	-   Penetration Testing
	-   Multistep and multivector attack scenarios to discover vulnerabilities
	-   Exploit vulnerabilities to gain access to infrastructure
	-   Can have repercussions when executed in a production environment:
	-   Availability/performance
	-   Raising IDS/IPS alarms
	-   Legal
	-   Fuzz Testing
	-   Tests a web application’s input response for stability/security
	-   Deliberately providing inputs that the program might not be expecting
	-   Sandboxing
	-   Testing software in a non-production environment so there is no impact on the production infrastructure if there is an issue with the code

BC/DR: Business Continuity/Disaster Recovery

	-   RPO: Recovery Point Objective
	-   Snapshot or backup as a recovery point, how far back in time to recover the data
	-   How much data can I afford to lose if we crash between backups?
	-   RTO: Recovery Time Objective
	-   How long can I afford to be down?

OWASP: Open Web Application Security Project -  Top 10

	-   Injection
	-   Broken Auth/Session Management
	-   XSS
	-   Insecure Direct object references
	-   Security misconfiguration
	-   Sensitive data exposure
	-   Missing Function level access control
	-   Cross-site request forgery
	-   Using known vulnerable components
	-   Unvalidated redirects and forwards

OWASP - Software Assurance Maturity Model

	-   Governance
	-   Construction
	-   Verification
	-   Deployment

STRIDE

	-   Spoofing
	-   Tampering
	-   Repudiation
	-   Information Leak
	-   Denial Of Service
	-   Escalation of Privileges

ITIL: Information Technology Infrastructure Library

	-   Promotes security management best practices

PCI DSS - Payment Card Industry

	-   Has mandatory compliance regulation for cardholder cloud services
	-   E-commerce/retail

### ** Laws, Regulations, Acts and Policys **

GLBA: Gramm-Leach-Biley Act

	-   Banks, Credit Unions, Pawn Shops, Data Processors
	-   **Secure consumer PII**
	-   “Safeguards” Rule
	-   Designate a coordinator: implement/ensure controls
	-   Risk Assessment
	-   Logical controls based on risk assessment
	-   Appropriate controls with its vendors: Certs/Controls/Reporting
	-   Ongoing review of security controls

SOX: Sarbanes Oxley Act

	-   White-collar/Managers/CEO/CFO fraud
	-   Accountability for unethical acts within an organization/corporation
	-   “Cooking the books”
	-   Restored public faith in financial reporting processes of corporations
	-   Internal control evaluations
	-   Independent Audit Committees (not board of directors)
	-   Increased whistleblower protections

SCA: Stored Comms Act

	-   Law enforcement ability to compel the release of your stored communications
	-   Crime to access individuals email without authorization
	-   Fine/10yr jail term
	-   Individuals can seek damages in a civil suit against hackers of public providers in which their private data is released
	-   Hacking of a personal computer or smartphone, not considered a facility
	-   Providers are restricted from voluntarily disclosing consumer records
	-   Only covers public providers
	-   Exceptions:
	-   If law enforcement has a warrant for comms that are stored for less than 180 days
	-   Warrant not needed if data was stored longer than 180 days (D orders)
	-   Do not require probable cause without a warrant (180 days)

FISMA: Federal Information Security Management Act

	-   Tasked NIST with the responsibility of developing security standards
  
FIPS 140-2: A NIST document that lists accredited and outmoded cryptosystems.

FIPS 200: Federal Information Processing Standard 

	-   Minimum Security requirements for federal information and information systems
	-   A standard for adoption and use by federal departments that has been developed by the IT lab and published by NIST
	-   Defines the CIA triad
	-   17 Control families

Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC

	-   Organizations that process personal data will register themselves with the supervisory authority of the EU member state
	-   Each Member state must have a Data Protection Supervisory Authority

DRM: Data Rights Management

	-   Cannot illegally copy things and re-distribute
	-   Digital content is encrypted
	-   DRM software on the device can access the key and decrypt the content
	-   Protects financial incentive/profits of E-Commerce/content companies
	-   EX: License keys for Microsoft products

DMCA: Digital Millennium Copyright Act

	-   DMCA take down notice: EX: copyright strikes on youtube
	-   EX: Youtube can’t be sued if somebody uploads copyrighted/illegal content
	-   Anti-circumvention provisions
	-   Illegal to try and break through DRM software/restrictions
	-   “Anti-tinkering” you can’t mess with your phone even though you bought it
	-   Safe Harbor
	-   Business ethics related: Protections for CEOs/Corporations/Providers against personal liability given they:
	-   Act In Good faith
	-   No Conflict of interest
	-   Appropriately Informed
	-   Third party would make the same decision

GDPR: General Data Protection Regulation

	-   For EU citizens
	-   Organizations need to prove they are keeping PII safe
	-   Require consent to store data from the consumer
	-   Massive penalties, 4% of annual profits
	-   The organization must reveal data breaches within 72 hours
	-   Right to be forgotten, companies must delete your data upon request

NIST SP 800-53

	-   Giant list of controls used to control communication systems (high level implementation)

NIST Risk Management Framework Steps:

	-   Categorize: NIST SP 800-60
	-   Select: NIST SP 800-53
	-   Implement: NIST SP 800-160
	-   Assess: NIST SP 800-53A
	-   Authorize: NIST SP 800-37
	-   Monitor: NIST SP 800-53A

NIST 500-291 (Characteristics of Cloud Computing)

	-   Broad network access
	-   On-demand self-service
	-   Resource pooling
	-   Measured/Metered service
	-   Rapid Elasticity
  
NIST 800-53: A guidance document with the primary goal of ensuring that appropriate security requirements and controls are applied to all U.S. federal government information in information management systems.

NIST SP 800-64

	-   Security Considerations for the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC)
	-   Focuses on the information security of the SDLC
	-   ID’s key security roles and responsibilities who carry out dev projects (planner, admins, etc)
	-   Integrates security into traditional SDLC steps

ISO/IEC 19086 - SLA Agreements

ISO 27001 Annex A: Information Security for supplier relationships (API keys/Usage Policy)

ISO/IEC 27000 Series: 

	-   27002: Weight and Metrics to measure risk controls
	-   27002:2014 - Supply chain risks
	-   27018:2014
	-   Cloud Privacy Standard
	-   27043:2015
	-   International Incident Investigation Principles

ISO/IEC 31000 Series - Risk Management Framework


## Practice Tests

Cloud Concept Questitons:
	1. Who provides cloud computing services for sale to third parties?
		- Cloud Service Providers offer cloud services for sale to third parties
	2. What are some characteristics of cloud computing?
		- Its Ubiquitous
		- its convenient
		- its on-demand
	3. What situation occurs when cloud service customers purchuse more services than exist in the provider's actual capacity?
		- Oversubscription - with oversubscription, the sold capactiy exceeds the actual capacity
	4. What type of cloud scaling adds more servers to the pool to meet increased demand?
		- Horizontal Scaling
	

[/practice\_tests.xlsx](/practice_tests.xlsx)